Another iron in C. difficile's fire
{"doi": "10.1016/j.chom.2023.12.008", "year": "2023", "journal": "Cell Host and Microbe", "keywords": []}
[{"title": "Clostridioides difficile ferrosome organelles combat nutritional immunity", "doi": "", "year": "2023", "journal": "Nature"}, {"title": "Iron, the Oxygen-Carrier of Respiration-Ferment", "doi": "", "year": "1925", "journal": "Science"}, {"title": "Escape from bacterial iron piracy through rapid evolution of transferrin", "doi": "", "year": "2014", "journal": "Science"}, {"title": "Thepathogen-associatediroAgenecluster mediates bacterial evasion of lipocalin 2", "doi": "", "year": "2006", "journal": "Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA"}, {"title": "Clostridium difficile infection", "doi": "", "year": "2015", "journal": "N. Engl. J. Med"}, {"title": "Diagnosis and management of Clostridioides difficile infection in patients with inflammatory bowel disease", "doi": "", "year": "2021", "journal": "Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol"}, {"title": "Distinct gene clusters drive formation of ferrosome organelles in bacteria", "doi": "", "year": "2022", "journal": "Nature"}, {"title": "Transcriptional response of Clostridium difficile to low iron conditions", "doi": "", "year": "2018", "journal": "Pathog. Dis"}, {"title": "Iron fortification adversely affects the gut microbiome, increases pathogen abundance and induces intestinal inflammation in Kenyan infants", "doi": "", "year": "2015", "journal": "Gut"}, {"title": "Iron-containing micronutrient powders modify the effect of oral antibiotics on the infant gut microbiome and increase post-antibiotic diarrhoea risk: a controlled study in Kenya", "doi": "", "year": "2019", "journal": "Gut"}]

Previews
Another iron in C. difficile's fire
Hal Drakesmith1,* and Michael B. Zimmermann1
1MRC Translational Immune Discovery Unit, MRC Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University
of Oxford, Oxford OX3 0EU, UK
*Correspondence: alexander.drakesmith@imm.ox.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2023.12.008
Iron is arguably the most important nutrient in the ongoing battle between hosts and bacteria. Recently in
Nature, a unique iron storage organelle, the ferrosome, was discovered in the human pathogen Clostridioides
difficile.1 But what is the role of ferrosomes and how do they affect bacterial behavior and infection?
In 1925, Otto Warburg asserted, ''Every
living cell contains iron and that life
without iron is impossible.''2 Iron holds
a
distinctive
position
in
biochemistry
because of its ability to shuttle electrons
and form bonds with a diverse range of
protein partners. Consequently, iron is a
key co-factor for many enzyme systems
conserved across kingdoms of life. Iron
is a crucial metal resource scavenged by
invading bacteria from infected mammalian hosts. The concept of ''nutritional immunity,'' where hosts protect their iron resources, but pathogen adaptation can
overcome such defenses, is a well-established theme in evolutionary genetics with
some beautiful examples.3,4 A further
consideration is that because of its chemical reactivity, too much iron is perilous for
a cell. Therefore, microbes must be able
to both efficiently acquire iron from a usually ungenerous host and yet defend
themselves against toxic overabundance.
Adding to this complexity, significant
changes in iron concentration may occur
in the intestinal lumen. This can happen,
for instance, when iron from food remains
unabsorbed or in cases of gastrointestinal
inflammation and/or bleeding.
Clostridioides difficile is a gram-positive
anaerobic bacillus first described in 1935
in
the
stool
of
healthy
newborns.
C. difficile infection (CDI) was thought to
be nonpathogenic until it was identified
as the source of exotoxins in stools of patients with pseudomembranous colitis.
There has been a sharp increase in CDI
incidence and mortality across industrialized countries and it is now the most
frequently reported nosocomial pathogen
in the United States.5 CDI may complicate
the course of inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD) and cause serious exacerbations of
their disease with high recurrence rates.6
Prevention
and
treatment
options
of
CDI are limited and new strategies for
treating this major public health threat
are needed. Thus, the report by Pi et al.1
is of importance because a better basic
understanding of CDI could lead to new
therapeutic options. Because replication
of C. difficile is facilitated by iron acquisition, an iron-oriented study of Clostridioides biology was warranted.
In
the
search
to
understand
how
C. difficile maintains iron homeostasis, Pi
et al. revealed the presence of ferrosomes
in these bacteria. Ferrosomes are membrane-bound organelles containing iron,
phosphorous, and oxygen originally identified in Desulfovibrio magneticus RS-1.
The term was coined when their presence
was also noted in Rhodopseudomonas
palustris
and
Shewanella
putrefaciens
and shown to be encoded by the rather
broadly phylogenetically distributed fez
operon.7 In S. putrefaciens, ferrosomes
likely enable anaerobic adaptation to
iron starvation.7 However, their function
in C. difficile appears to be more nuanced.
The fez operon in C. difficile contains
two transcription start sites and proteincoding genes fezA and fezB, the latter of
which shares >30% sequence identity
with P1B6-ATPase transporter that mediates ferrosome formation in gram-negative anaerobes. Pi et al. investigated the
regulation and function of fezB. The fez
operon was strongly induced by both
iron deprivation and knockout of the transcription factor fur, which is active when
cells are iron replete. However, fezB deletion did not confer a growth defect under
conditions of iron deprivation or iron
excess. Instead, a lag in growth was
observed
when
fezB-deficient,
irondeprived cells were exposed to a strong
dose of iron sulfate. Pi et al. suggest the
fez system may be induced in order to
protect an iron deficient cell from a sudden influx of potentially toxic iron.
Using a combination of scanning transmission
electron
microscopy,
energy
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, electron
tomography, LC-MS-MS, and cryo-electron tomography, C. difficile were then
rigorously analyzed for ferrosome-type
structures. The authors showed that the
fez operon is necessary and sufficient for
formation of Fe, O, and P-containing
membrane-bound amorphous granules
that are associated with FezA and FezB
proteins and are often near the cell
membrane.
Next, the authors tested whether lack of
ferrosomes in fezB-deficient C. difficile
altered aspects of infection in murine
models. After four days of infection,
mice
infected
with
fezB-deficient
C.
difficile
had
decreased
bacterial
burden and exhibited less weight loss
compared with mice infected with wildtype C. difficile. In a mouse model of colitis, although weight loss was comparable
between bacterial strains, fezB-deficient
C. difficile demonstrated lower colonization
and
less
intestinal
inflammation
compared to WT. Lastly, in the gut, the
iron-sequestering
protein
calprotectin
was induced by inflammation, calprotectin upregulated the fez operon in vitro
and in vivo, and in mice lacking calprotectin, colonization and weight loss was
unaffected by loss of the ferrosome system. These results indicate that ferrosomes may be needed in mice to counteract a situation of low iron availability
due to nutritional immunity mediated by
calprotectin.
Low iron availability modifies many
aspects of C. difficile behavior.8 Pi et al.
suggest ferrosomes facilitate C. difficile
ll
Cell Host & Microbe 32, January 10, 2024 a 2023 Elsevier Inc.
1

transition from low iron availability to
excess, for example, perhaps in flareups of IBD that may involve blood loss.
Besides IBD, another setting in which
pathogens like C. difficile must adapt to
rapid shifts in colonic iron availability is
in iron-deficient young children in low-income countries who are given iron supplements. These supplements produce
large increases in colonic iron because
the absorption of their high iron dose is
low. In controlled intervention studies,
iron supplements given to Kenyan children significantly increased abundances
of
Clostridioides,
including
both
C. difficile and C. perfringens.9 In addition,
antibiotic efficacy against enteropathogens, such as C. difficile, may also
be modified by high colonic iron concentrations.10 Other enteropathogens can
thrive in conditions of widely varying iron
supply, and it is possible they also adapt
via ferrosome-like mechanisms. Therefore, whether ferrosomes contribute to intestinal pathology associated with high
doses
of
oral
iron
is
an
intriguing
possibility.
The study by Pi et al. raises further unanswered
questions.
Are
ferrosomes
more important for detoxifying excess
iron as the in vitro analysis suggests, or
for protecting against calprotectin-mediated iron deprivation, as the mouse data
indicates, or is it a bit of both? Do ferrosomes store iron derived from more physiological sources such as heme and dietary iron? Does the ferrosome system
only detoxify excess iron or is it also
used to cope with other environmental
toxic
metals?
Do
different
stressors
modulate ferrosome synthesis, so that
some
ferrosomes
are
different
from
others? How important are ferrosomes in
human
C.
difficile
infection?
Lastly,
C. difficile, like many bacteria, express
the
''classical''
iron
storage
protein,
ferritin. Ferritin, unlike fez operon transcription, is decreased during iron deprivation. How do ferritin and ferrosome synthesis interrelate, and how do cells decide
which iron-storage facility to use?
Overall, the discovery of ferrosomes in
C. difficile is an exciting finding that opens
up several lines of investigation in basic
science and antibacterial therapeutics
while providing new insights into how
iron fluxes may modulate the intestinal microbiota in health and disease.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
H.D. is supported by the Medical Research Council
UK. We thank Simon C. Andrews for helpful
discussions.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Pi, H., Sun, R., McBride, J.R., Kruse, A.R.S.,
Gibson-Corley,
K.N.,
Krystofiak,
E.S.,
Nicholson, M.R., Spraggins, J.M., Zhou, Q.,
and Skaar, E.P. (2023). Clostridioides difficile
ferrosome organelles combat nutritional immunity. Nature 623, 1009-1016.
2. Warburg, O. (1925). Iron, the Oxygen-Carrier of
Respiration-Ferment. Science 61, 575-582.
3. Barber, M.F., and Elde, N.C. (2014). Escape
from bacterial iron piracy through rapid evolution of transferrin. Science 346, 1362-1366.
4. Fischbach, M.A., Lin, H., Zhou, L., Yu, Y.,
Abergel,
R.J.,
Liu,
D.R.,
Raymond,
K.N.,
Wanner, B.L., Strong, R.K., Walsh, C.T., et al.
(2006).Thepathogen-associatediroAgenecluster mediates bacterial evasion of lipocalin 2.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 16502-16507.
5. Leffler,
D.A.,
and
Lamont,
J.T.
(2015).
Clostridium difficile infection. N. Engl. J. Med.
372, 1539-1548.
6. Dalal,
R.S.,
and
Allegretti,
J.R.
(2021).
Diagnosis and management of Clostridioides
difficile infection in patients with inflammatory
bowel disease. Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 37,
336-343.
7. Grant,
C.R.,
Amor,
M.,
Trujillo,
H.A.,
Krishnapura, S., Iavarone, A.T., and Komeili,
A. (2022). Distinct gene clusters drive formation
of
ferrosome
organelles
in
bacteria.
Nature 606, 160-164.
8. Hastie, J.L., Hanna, P.C., and Carlson, P.E.
(2018). Transcriptional response of Clostridium
difficile to low iron conditions. Pathog. Dis. 76,
fty009.
9. Jaeggi, T., Kortman, G.A.M., Moretti, D.,
Chassard,
C.,
Holding,
P.,
Dostal,
A.,
Boekhorst, J., Timmerman, H.M., Swinkels,
D.W., Tjalsma, H., et al. (2015). Iron fortification
adversely affects the gut microbiome, increases pathogen abundance and induces intestinal inflammation in Kenyan infants. Gut 64,
731-742.
10. Paganini, D., Uyoga, M.A., Kortman, G.A.M.,
Cercamondi, C.I., Winkler, H.C., Boekhorst,
J., Moretti, D., Lacroix, C., Karanja, S., and
Zimmermann, M.B. (2019). Iron-containing micronutrient powders modify the effect of oral
antibiotics on the infant gut microbiome and
increase
post-antibiotic
diarrhoea
risk:
a
controlled study in Kenya. Gut 68, 645-653.
Previews
2
Cell Host & Microbe 32, January 10, 2024
ll