======================================================================
论文信息提取结果
======================================================================

【源文件】41467_2022_Article_31334.pdf

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【标题 / Title】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Engineering probiotics to inhibit Clostridioides difﬁcile infection by dynamic regulation of intestinal metabolism

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【DOI】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【摘要 / Abstract】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[未识别到摘要]

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【全文 / Full Text】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
ARTICLE
Engineering probiotics to inhibit Clostridioides
difﬁcile infection by dynamic regulation of intestinal
metabolism
Elvin Koh
1,2,3,7, In Young Hwang1,2,3,7, Hui Ling Lee1,2,3, Ryan De Sotto1,2,3, Jonathan Wei Jie Lee
1,2,4,
Yung Seng Lee
1,2,5, John C. March6 & Matthew Wook Chang
1,2,3✉
Clostridioides difﬁcile infection (CDI) results in signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality in hospitalised patients. The pathogenesis of CDI is intrinsically related to the ability of C. difﬁcile to
shufﬂe between active vegetative cells and dormant endospores through the processes of
germination and sporulation. Here, we hypothesise that dysregulation of microbiomemediated bile salt metabolism contributes to CDI and that its alleviation can limit the
pathogenesis of CDI. We engineer a genetic circuit harbouring a genetically encoded sensor,
ampliﬁer and actuator in probiotics to restore intestinal bile salt metabolism in response to
antibiotic-induced microbiome dysbiosis. We demonstrate that the engineered probiotics
limited the germination of endospores and the growth of vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile in vitro
and further signiﬁcantly reduced CDI in model mice, as evidenced by a 100% survival rate
and improved clinical outcomes. Our work presents an antimicrobial strategy that harnesses
the host-pathogen microenvironment as the intervention target to limit the pathogenesis of
infection.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
OPEN
1 NUS Synthetic Biology for Clinical and Technological Innovation (SynCTI), National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 2 Synthetic Biology
Translational Research Programme, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 3 Department of Biochemistry,
Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 4 Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 5 Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. 6 Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 7These authors contributed equally:
Elvin Koh, In Young Hwang. ✉email: bchcmw@nus.edu.sg
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;

C
lostridioides (or Clostridium) difﬁcile infection (CDI) is
the leading cause of healthcare-associated infectious
diarrhoea globally1–3. In the United States alone, CDI
annually causes over 500,000 infections and 20,000 deaths, with
an annual estimated healthcare cost of $4.8 billion4. The eradication of CDI is impaired by the frequent recurrence of the disease; 20.9% of CDI cases recur once or more within 30 days post
treatment5. Paradoxically, while the CDI treatment regimen
involves antibiotic therapy, antibiotics have been established as a
major risk factor for CDI. Antibiotics trigger and prolong a state
of dysbiosis in the intestine, characterised by a loss of bacterial
diversity and altered production of microbiome-derived intestinal
metabolites, hindering the recovery of the normal colonic
microbiome and leading to CDI and recurrent CDI (rCDI)1,4.
The pathogenesis of CDI and rCDI is intrinsically related to the
ability of C. difﬁcile to shufﬂe between active vegetative cells and
dormant endospores through the processes of germination and
sporulation6. Carriers of C. difﬁcile endospores may remain
asymptomatic as the endospores remain dormant in the human
gastrointestinal tract. Furthermore, endospores are inherently
resistant to antibiotics6. Perturbation to the native balance of the
microbiome, or dysbiosis, is suggested to trigger the germination
of C. difﬁcile endospores and allow rapid expansion of C. difﬁcile,
leading to infection7–9. Upon colonisation of the gastrointestinal
tract, vegetative C. difﬁcile secretes exotoxins, such as C. difﬁcile
toxin A (TcdA) and B (TcdB), that impair tight junctions and
disrupt the actin cytoskeleton in human intestinal epithelial
cells10,11. The toxins result in extensive colonic inﬂammation and
epithelial tissue damage, which manifest as symptomatic CDI10.
The persistence of the dysbiosis induced by antibiotic therapy
enables the residual endospores of C. difﬁcile that evade treatment
to germinate and lead to rCDI4.
Recent evidence has pointed to a causal relationship between
CDI
and
dysregulation
of
microbiome-mediated
bile
salt
metabolism7,12,13, which affects the germination of C. difﬁcile9,13.
In humans, bile salts are synthesised and conjugated in the liver
and secreted into the upper intestine (duodenum), reabsorbed at
the distal small intestine (ileum) and returned to the liver via the
portal circulation9,14. Bile salts are discharged from the human
liver as primary bile salts conjugated to taurine or glycine. The
conjugated primary bile salts then undergo deconjugation and
subsequent 7α-dehydroxylation to secondary bile acids by
members of the intestinal microbiota15–17. As a result of these
modiﬁcations, bile salts in the colon exist predominantly as
unconjugated primary or secondary forms9,15,16. Physiological
microbiome-mediated bile salt metabolism can be disrupted by
antibiotic-induced dysbiosis, for instance, leading to an overaccumulation of conjugated bile salts such as taurocholate in the
colon9,13. Taurocholate is a strong germinant of C. difﬁcile routinely utilised to induce the germination of C. difﬁcile endospores
in vitro. Correspondingly, dysbiosis reduces the intestinal levels of
unconjugated and secondary bile salts, which reportedly inhibit C.
difﬁcile colonisation9,12,13,18.
As dysbiosis-mediated bile salt metabolism contributes to CDI,
we, therefore, hypothesised that microbiome modulation of bile
salt metabolism can be targeted to disrupt the pathogenesis of
CDI. To test this hypothesis, we engineered probiotics to restore
intestinal bile salt metabolism in response to antibiotic-induced
microbiome dysbiosis (Fig. 1). We designed a genetic circuit
harbouring a genetically encoded sensor, ampliﬁer and actuator
that enabled hydrolase-mediated modulation of the conjugated
bile salts (potential germinants) to the unconjugated forms. This
modulation was dynamically controlled by a genetically encoded
sensor that detects sialic acid, a proxy signal for microbiome
dysbiosis whose levels are elevated upon antibiotic-induced dysbiosis in the intestine19. We demonstrated that the engineered
probiotics limited the germination of endospores and the growth
of vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile in vitro and, furthermore, signiﬁcantly reduced CDI in murine models, as evidenced by a 100%
survival rate and improved clinical symptoms. Our work presents
a targeted microbiome-modulation strategy that harnesses the
host–pathogen microenvironment as the intervention target to
limit the pathogenesis of infection, suggesting the potential for
the modulation of bile salt metabolism to serve as a mechanism of
action for CDI therapy.
Results
Hydrolase-mediated bile salt deconjugation inhibits C. difﬁcile
germination and growth. To validate our hypothesis that the
modulation of bile salt proﬁles controls C. difﬁcile germination,
we assessed the effect of taurocholate and its deconjugated form,
cholate, on the germination and growth of C. difﬁcile (Supplementary Fig. 1A). While the physiological level of bile salts varies
along the intestinal tract, we have taken 2 mM of bile salts as an
average representative concentration to use for in vitro assays9,20.
Figure 2A, B show that cholate signiﬁcantly decreased the germination of the endospores by up to 81% and the number of
viable vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile strains by up to 82%. We then
chose the bile salt hydrolase Cbh of Clostridium perfringens as an
enzyme to be introduced into probiotics to deconjugate taurocholate into cholate. We used this enzyme because Cbh uses
taurocholate as a preferred substrate and remains more functional
at physiological pH than other bile salt hydrolases21. Figure 2C
shows that recombinant Cbh (Supplementary Fig. 1B, C) converted 99.2% of the taurocholate into cholate. Cbh also deconjugated glycocholate, another conjugated primary bile salt present
in the gut, with similar efﬁciency. Glycocholate is also reported to
be a germinant of C. difﬁcile, and the deconjugating activity of
Cbh against both taurocholate and glycocholate achieved >99%
reduction of conjugated bile salts (Fig. 2D). Figure 2E, F show
that the group with recombinant Cbh exhibited a 96% lower
endospore germination rate and 89% fewer viable vegetative cells
than the control group with taurocholate and no Cbh. These
results suggested that recombinantly expressed Cbh deconjugated
taurocholate into cholate and that this enzymatic deconjugation
signiﬁcantly inhibited the germination of endospores and the
growth of vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile.
Engineering of dysbiosis-sensing circuits in probiotics. We
chose E. coli Nissle 1917 as the probiotic host because it is an
extensively studied probiotic with a long safety record in
humans22,23. Furthermore, as a gram-negative bacterium, E. coli
Nissle 1917 can be employed in combination with the current
CDI therapy, which entails the use of antibiotics that target grampositive bacteria. We used the previously reported auxotrophic E.
coli Nissle 1917 strain as the base strain, which requires exogenous D-alanine for survival (denoted by EcN), because it allows
antibiotic-free selection, enhances plasmid stability, and provides
a means for biocontainment22,24.
Based on increasing evidence that microbiome dysbiosis
preludes the onset of CDI7,8,12,13,19,25, we hypothesised that a
genetic sensor that regulates the expression of Cbh in response to
microbiome
dysbiosis
might
increase
the
efﬁcacy
of
our
engineered probiotics against CDI. We chose sialic acid as a
proxy signal for dysbiosis because the level of sialic acid is
elevated in the intraluminal space upon antibiotic treatment,
which has been postulated to be a result of a dysbiosis-mediated
imbalance between sialic acid-catabolising and/or sialidaseexpressing members of the microbiome19. Sialic acid also
supports the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal infections, including
CDI, possibly because pathogens can use sialic acid as a carbon
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

source and decorate the cellular surface with sialic acid to evade
host responses19,26–28.
We selected the promoter pNanA as a core sensor element
because it has been postulated to be responsive to sialic acid29.
We characterised pNanA with the transcriptional regulator NanR
(Supplementary Fig. 2A). Supplementary Fig. 2B shows that
pNanA was responsive to sialic acid when NanR was expressed,
while pNanA alone resulted in a high background with a low
response. Then, to improve the dynamic range of the pNanANanR sensor (termed ‘Sensor’), we modulated the expression level
of NanR using a set of constitutive promoters and ribosome
binding sites. Fig. 3A shows that the combination of J23113
(promoter) and rbs4 (RBS) led to the highest dynamic range in
response to sialic acid. We also observed that the pNanA-NanR
sensor dynamically regulated the expression of GFP (reporter
protein), where the removal of sialic acid brought the expression
back to the basal level (Supplementary Fig. 2C, D). Notably, the
pNanA sequence contains a catabolite activator protein (CAP)
binding site. In line with this feature, Fig. 3B shows that glucose
signiﬁcantly reduced the GFP expression in response to sialic
acid. The level of glucose is signiﬁcantly lower in the ileum,
caecum and colon30, where C. difﬁcile primarily colonises13.
Therefore, we hypothesised that the pNanA-NanR sensor can
provide another layer of expression control such that the
expression of Cbh increases when the engineered probiotics
reach the target sites: the ileum, caecum and colon.
Engineering of sensor-ampliﬁer-actuator circuits in probiotics.
Next, we examined whether the expression of Cbh (termed
‘Actuator’), when induced by the sialic acid sensor, could inhibit
the germination of C. difﬁcile endospores. Figure 3C shows a
reduction in endospore germination by up to 47%, which indicated a signiﬁcantly lower efﬁcacy than that of puriﬁed recombinant Cbh (Fig. 2D). We also observed low conversion of
taurocholate into cholate (Fig. 3D). Therefore, we hypothesised
that the low germination inhibition might be due to insufﬁcient
expression of Cbh. To test this hypothesis, we added an ampliﬁer
module to the sensor-actuator circuit. Speciﬁcally, the transcriptional activator gene cadC was placed under the control of the
promoter pNanA so that CadC (termed ‘Ampliﬁer’) could
activate the promoter pCadBA to amplify Cbh expression. The
ampliﬁer module was evaluated for sialic acid-responsivity
(Supplementary Fig. 2E). CadC regulates the cad operon and
has been shown to be pH sensitive31, providing an additional
layer of expression control32. A module with constitutive GFP
expression was also evaluated for comparison (Supplementary
Fig. 2F). The ﬁnal sensor-ampliﬁer-actuator circuit, where Cbh
served as an actuator (Fig. 3E), resulted in signiﬁcantly increased
actuator (Cbh) expression of the circuit (Fig. 3F). The expression
level of Cbh under sialic acid induction was comparable to that of
puriﬁed recombinant Cbh (Fig. 3G), which led to signiﬁcant
germination and growth inhibition (Fig. 2D, E). These results
suggest that the EcN harbouring the aforementioned sensorampliﬁer-actuator circuit (denoted by EcN-Cbh), which comprises pNanA, NanR, CadC, pCadBA and Cbh, might signiﬁcantly inhibit the germination and growth of C. difﬁcile.
The engineered probiotics inhibit C. difﬁcile germination and
growth. We then examined the extent to which EcN-Cbh could
deconjugate taurocholate into cholate and reduce the germination
of C. difﬁcile endospores. In response to sialic acid, EcN-Cbh fully
converted taurocholate into cholate (Fig. 4A) and caused a 98%
reduction in endospore germination (Fig. 4B). Notably, the
absence of sialic acid led to less but still considerable deconjugation (45%) and germination reduction (90%), likely due to the
basal expression of Cbh in EcN-Cbh. Basal expression of Cbh did
not signiﬁcantly alter the growth of the host strains (Supplementary Fig. 3A). In addition, no extracellular deconjugation
activity of EcN-Cbh was observed (Supplementary Fig. 4), suggesting that the deconjugation action of EcN-Cbh remained
intracellular, although Cbh is reportedly secreted in gram-positive
C. perfringens33.
Next, we determined whether EcN-Cbh could inhibit the
growth of the vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile. Figure 4C shows that
EcN-Cbh strongly reduced the number of viable vegetative cells.
To further investigate the mechanism of this reduction, we
evaluated the numbers of viable vegetative C. difﬁcile cells after
culture with EcN-Cbh, taurocholate and cholate. Supplementary
Fig. 3B, C indicate that the growth inhibition was due to cholate.
Figure 4C shows that 1-hour preincubation with taurocholate was
Fig. 1 Schematic of the engineered probiotics against CDI. Probiotics were engineered to restore intestinal bile salt metabolism in response to antibioticinduced microbiome dysbiosis in order to inhibit the germination and growth of C. difﬁcile.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3

sufﬁcient to signiﬁcantly inhibit the vegetative growth of C.
difﬁcile cultured with EcN-Cbh. Together, these results suggest
that EcN-Cbh signiﬁcantly inhibits the germination of endospores and vegetative cells of C. difﬁcile.
The engineered probiotics reduce C. difﬁcile toxicity. To
investigate whether and the extent to which germination and
growth inhibition by EcN-Cbh could lead to a reduction in the
toxicity of C. difﬁcile, we ﬁrst assessed the amount of the C.
difﬁcile exotoxin TcdA when C. difﬁcile was cocultured with EcNCbh. Figure 4D shows that EcN-Cbh signiﬁcantly decreased the
level of TcdA in the culture, which likely resulted from lowered
germination and growth of C. difﬁcile. Then, we evaluated the
viability of human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma cells
(Caco-2 cells) upon exposure to the supernatant of C. difﬁcile.
EcN-Cbh signiﬁcantly improved the viability of Caco-2 cells
exposed to C. difﬁcile (Fig. 4E). These results together suggest that
pre-treatment with EcN-Cbh reduced C. difﬁcile toxicity.
The engineered probiotics inhibit CDI in a murine model. The
aforementioned in vitro results prompted us to hypothesise that
EcN-Cbh might inhibit CDI in vivo. To test this hypothesis, we
evaluated whether and the extent to which EcN-Cbh could reduce
mortality and morbidity in a murine model of CDI that was
Fig. 2 The bile salt hydrolase Cbh inhibits C. difﬁcile via deconjugation of taurocholate. A Germination of endospores from C. difﬁcile strains ((i) CD630,
(ii)VPI10463, (iii) BAA1870, and (iv) 9689), under different concentrations of bile salt (taurocholate or cholate). The experiments were set with the same
initial endospore number and indicated the amount of germination as a percentage of the maximal germinated CFUs. n = 2 independent experiments.
B Growth of vegetative cells from C. difﬁcile with 2 mM bile salt (taurocholate or cholate) or without bile salt (control) in BHIS media. n = 3 independent
experiments. C Quantiﬁcation of bile salts following incubation with Cbh. The concentrations of taurocholate, glycocholate and cholate were determined
through LC/MS. Unpaired two-sided Student’s t-tests were performed to compare the bile salt concentrations between the Cbh-treated and control groups
(p < 0.0001). ****P < 0.0001. n = 3 independent experiments. D Quantiﬁcation of bile salts (5 mM taurocholate and 5 mM glycocholate) following
incubation with Cbh. The concentrations of taurocholate, glycocholate and cholate were determined through LC/MS. n = 3 independent experiments.
E Germination of puriﬁed C. difﬁcile endospores and F growth of vegetative C. difﬁcile following treatment with Cbh for 1 or 12 h, respectively. The reactions
were set up as follows: the control group contained blank buffer, the Cbh-only group contained puriﬁed Cbh-his6 without bile salt (ﬁnal concentration of
2 mM), the taurocholate-only group contained taurocholate without enzymes and the Cbh + taurocholate group contained puriﬁed Cbh and taurocholate.
Relative endospore germination was calculated by normalising to taurocholate-only group. Unpaired two-sided Student’s t-test was performed to compare
the Cbh + taurocholate group and the taurocholate-only control group (p = 0.0085). *P < 0.05. n = 3 independent experiments. All data were presented as
mean values with error bars representing SEMs of triplicates unless stated otherwise. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

previously established34,35 (Fig. 5A). The model mice were given
engineered probiotics prior to being exposed to a virulent strain
of C. difﬁcile, VPI10463, that has been reported to induce signiﬁcant mortality and symptomatic displays34,36. The evaluation
was conducted using a treatment group (EcN-Cbh) and ﬁve
control groups: (i) a no-sensor control (EcN-Cbh-S-) group, (ii) a
no-ampliﬁer control (EcN-Cbh-A-) group, (iii) a no-actuator
control (EcN-Cbh-) group, (iv) a wild-type control (EcN-WT)
group and (v) an infection control (CD) group (Fig. 5B). Figure 5C shows the extent of deconjugation activities of the probiotics.
Supplementary
Figs.
5,
6
and
8
show
further
characteristics of these probiotics, such as growth, expression,
Fig. 3 Development and characterisation of a sialic acid-responsive biosensor. A Optimisation of pNanA induction via modulation of the nanR coexpression level with different combinations of constitutive promoters (Pcon) and ribosome binding sites (rbs). GFP was expressed under the control of
pNanA as a reporter gene in all constructs. Induction was performed with sialic acid. The relative GFP expression after 3 h of induction is shown. Signal-tonoise represents the ratio between the induced to the uninduced GFP expression. B Relative GFP ﬂuorescence of EcN expressing the selected pCon-rbs
combination (J23113-rbs4-nanR-pNanA-gfp) after 3 h of incubation with varying concentrations of glucose with or without 0.2% sialic acid. C Germination
efﬁciency of puriﬁed C. difﬁcile endospores in taurocholate and/or sialic acid treated with EcN expressing Cbh from a selected sialic acid sensor construct
(J23113-nanR-pNanA-cbh; EcN-pNanA-Cbh). No-EcN reaction and circuit control (EcN-circuit ctrl) were used as controls. The circuit control expressed GFP
in lieu of Cbh under the same construct design. The germinated endospore CFU values were normalised to the no-EcN control values. D Quantiﬁcation of
bile salts following incubation with EcN-Cbh from a selected sialic acid sensor construct (J23113-nanR-pNanA-cbh; EcN-pNanA-Cbh). No-Cbh reaction and
puriﬁed Cbh reaction were used as controls. The concentrations of taurocholate and cholate were determined through HPLC. E Circuit design of the ﬁnal
sensor-ampliﬁer construct (J23113-nanR-pNanA-cadC-pCadBA-gfp) consisting of sensor, ampliﬁer, and actuator modules. F Relative GFP ﬂuorescence of
EcN expressing the sensor-only construct (J23113-nanR-pNanA-gfp) or the sensor-ampliﬁer construct (J23113-nanR-pNanA-cadC-pCadBA-gfp). The relative
GFP expression after 3 and 6 h of induction is shown. G Immunoblot of Cbh-his6 expressed from different constructs in EcN. The pBad construct (araCpBad-cbh) was induced with L-arabinose for 16 h, and the sensor-only construct (J23113r4-nanR-pNanA-cbh) and sensor-ampliﬁer construct (J23113r4-nanRpNanA-cadC-pCadBA-cbh) were induced with sialic acid for 16 h. S represents the soluble fraction, and IS represents the insoluble fraction. The expected
size of Cbh-his6 is 38 kDa. The band on the ladder corresponds to 35 kDa. All data were presented as mean values with error bars representing SEMs of
triplicates (n = 3 independent experiments). Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5

antimicrobial sensitivity and intestinal viability. We assessed the
clinical symptoms, mortality and weight of the CDI model mice
as previously described35,37,38. Challenge with C. difﬁcile (107
CFU) was performed on day 0. The mortality, weight, and clinical
symptoms of the mice were then monitored over the course of
9 days. The clinical symptoms were scored according to a previously established standard38.
Figure 5 D shows that EcN-Cbh led to a 100% survival rate in
the model mice, while all the controls resulted in signiﬁcantly
lower survival rates ranging from 60 to 14.3%. Figure 5E indicates
Fig. 4 The engineered probiotics inhibit C. difﬁcile endospore germination and growth and reduce C. difﬁcile toxin secretion. A Quantiﬁcation of
taurocholate and cholate after 3 h incubation of taurocholate and/or sialic acid with EcN or EcN expressing the sensor-ampliﬁer-cbh construct (EcN-Cbh).
Conversion efﬁciency (cholate/taurocholate) is shown. No-EcN reaction and circuit control (EcN-circuit ctrl) reaction were used as controls. The circuit
control expressed GFP in lieu of Cbh under the same construct design. B Germination efﬁciency of puriﬁed C. difﬁcile endospores in taurocholate (tau) and/
or sialic acid (SA) treated with EcN-Cbh. The germinated endospore CFU values were normalised to a no-EcN control group. Unpaired two-sided Student’s
t-test was performed to compare the EcN-Cbh and EcN-circuit ctrl groups. *P < 0.05. C CFU values from coculture assays between vegetative C. difﬁcile cell
cultures and wild-type EcN (EcN WT), EcN-circuit ctrl, or EcN-Cbh cultures preincubated for 1 h with taurocholate. n = 2 independent experiments.
D Immunoblot of the C. difﬁcile toxin TcdA from concentrated supernatants at different time points of germinating C. difﬁcile culture. Reactions with or
without taurocholate were treated with EcN-Cbh and then incubated with C. difﬁcile endospores. No-EcN reaction and EcN-circuit ctrl reaction were used as
controls. EcN was induced with taurocholate and/or sialic acid. The blot was probed with an anti-tcdA antibody. L represents the protein ladder. The
expected size of TcdA is 308 kDa. E Relative cell viability of Caco-2 cells treated with supernatants collected from germinating C. difﬁcile cultures under the
conditions outlined for Fig. 4D (i) no-EcN control, (ii) EcN-circuit ctrl, (iii) EcN-Cbh with taurocholate, and (iv) EcN-Cbh without taurocholate. The
supernatants were diluted to ﬁnal concentrations of 1X (ﬁlled), 0.1X (grey), and 0.01X (empty). The relative cell viability was determined by MTT assay and
normalised to that of the untreated Caco-2 control group. n = 2 independent experiments. The numerical relative cell viability data are shown in a colourgraded matrix. Bottom: the coloured bar corresponds to the relative Caco-2 viability. All data were presented as mean values with error bars representing
SEMs of triplicates (n = 3 independent experiments), unless stated otherwise. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

that the infection model mice fed EcN-Cbh exhibited the least
weight loss, especially between day 2 and day 4, when the model
mice showed the most severe symptoms. Figure 5F shows that the
group of model mice fed EcN-Cbh had the lowest clinical
symptom score (CSS), 4.42. CSSs were used to indicate the
severity of the infection and ranged from normal (0 to 2) to mild
(3 to 5), moderate (6 to 8) or severe (9 to 12) based on a stool,
behaviour and weight loss38. All the controls exhibited signiﬁcantly higher CSSs than the EcN-Cbh-fed model mice, with
mean scores ranging from 7.73 to 10.00. Finally, we performed
16 S rRNA metagenomic sequencing on a microbiome library
extracted from the faeces of the animals in all the groups.
Figure 6A shows that only EcN-Cbh led to a decrease in the
abundance of C. difﬁcile in the model mice. Figure 6B shows that
among the groups that expressed Cbh, EcN-Cbh and the noampliﬁer control, both of which harboured the sensor, improved
the diversity of the microbiome of the model mice, as indicated by
a signiﬁcant increase in the Shannon diversity index. These
results together suggest that EcN-Cbh signiﬁcantly reduced CDI
in the model mice, as evidenced by a 100% survival rate,
improved clinical symptoms and a decrease in the abundance of
C. difﬁcile.
The engineered probiotics ameliorate histopathological injury
in model mice. To examine the extent of the injury caused by
CDI in the model mice, we conducted a histopathological
assessment of colon tissues harvested from the model mice on
days 3 and 4 following death or euthanasia. Figure 6C shows the
histologic injury scores (HISs) of the harvested colon tissue. The
HISs were used to indicate the severity of the infection and
ranged from normal (0 to 1) to mild (2 to 3), moderate (4 to 6) or
severe (7 to 9) based on epithelial tissue damage, mucosal oedema
and neutrophil inﬁltration38 (Fig. 6D). Model mice treated with
Fig. 5 The engineered probiotics improve infection prognosis and outcomes of CDI in a murine model. A Animal experiment timeline. B Table of the
groups used in this study and the constructs expressed in the probiotics. An additional group for infection control in which the animals were given sucrose
instead of probiotic was also used. The growth and expression characteristics of the probiotics are presented in Supplementary Fig. 5. C Quantiﬁcation of
taurocholate and cholate after incubation of the probiotics with taurocholate and sialic acid. A control reaction without EcN (“Control”) was set up. ND not
detected. The error bars represent the SEMs of results from two independent experiments. D Survival curves of the groups following C. difﬁcile challenge.
The log-rank Mantel–Cox test was performed to compare the treatment and control groups (p value against no-sensor control group <0.0001; no-ampliﬁer
control group = 0.0058; no-actuator control group = 0.0001; wild-type control group = 0.0002; infection control group = 0.0153). *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001.
E Relative mean weight of animals following C. difﬁcile challenge. Animals were removed from the calculation on the day following their death. F The
Clinical Sickness Score (CSS) of each animal was recorded as the highest score attained by the individual animal within 6 days postinfection. Daily CSSs are
shown in Supplementary Fig. 7. The infection severity based on the score is indicated by dotted lines. Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test was performed
to compare the treatment and control groups (p value against no-sensor control group = 0.0004; no-ampliﬁer control group = 0.0015; no-actuator control
group <0.0001; wild-type control group <0.0001; infection control group = 0.0010). **P < 0.01. The number of independent samples for each group used
are: treatment group, n = 12; no-sensor control group, n = 7; no-ampliﬁer control group, n = 10; no-actuator control group, n = 10; wild-type control group,
n = 5; and infection control group, n = 15. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7

EcN-Cbh displayed lower HISs than the control mice. These
results suggest that EcN-Cbh treatment markedly alleviates tissue
damage due to CDI in model mice.
The engineered probiotics modulate bile salt composition.
Next, to determine whether and how much the sialic acid level
was elevated and to assess whether EcN-Cbh modulated bile salt
proﬁles in vivo as hypothesised, we analysed the faeces of infection model mice as described in Fig. 7A. Figure 7B shows that the
level of sialic acid was increased 6-fold upon antibiotic treatment
from day -6 to -3, when EcN-Cbh was introduced, supporting our
use of a sialic acid biosensor in the probiotics. Figure 7C shows
that EcN-Cbh decreased the taurocholate level and increased the
cholate level in the infection model mice from day -3 to day 0
before C. difﬁcile was introduced. Figure 7D shows that the EcNCbh and the no-sensor control resulted in signiﬁcantly reduced
taurocholate and correspondingly elevated cholate levels. We also
quantiﬁed other bile salts, glycocholate, chenodeoxycholate,
lithocholate, and deoxycholate, in the faeces of the model mice
upon administration of the engineered probiotics (Supplementary
Fig. 9). Supplementary Fig. 9 shows that EcN-Cbh and the nosensor control led to an increased level of deoxycholate, a derivative of cholate, while the Cbh-expressing probiotics (i.e. EcNCbh, the no-sensor control, and the no-ampliﬁer control) resulted
in an increased level of chenodeoxycholate and its derivative
lithocholate. These results suggest that EcN-Cbh increases cholate
levels and decreases taurocholate levels in model mice, as
hypothesised.
Discussion
We report the engineering of probiotics to inhibit CDI through
dynamic regulation of bile salt hydrolase. The engineered probiotics harbour a genetic circuit that comprises a sensor, an
ampliﬁer, and an actuator. The circuit was designed to respond to
and control intestinal signals to inhibit the germination and
growth of C. difﬁcile through two actions: inhibition of germination via hydrolase-mediated deconjugation and inhibition of
vegetative growth via the deconjugated product cholate. This
Fig. 6 The engineered probiotics improve infection prognosis and outcomes of CDI in a murine model. A Relative abundance of C. difﬁcile from
metagenomic sequencing of 16 S rRNA from a genomic library of microbiomes extracted from faecal samples of all treatment and control groups. Faecal
samples from day 1 and day 3 postinfection were sequenced. Unpaired two-sided Student t-test was performed to compare relative abundance of C. difﬁcile
between day 1 and day 3 (p value for treatment group = 0.05, no-sensor control group = 0.2979; no-ampliﬁer control group = 0.0412; no-actuator control
group <0.0001; wild-type control group = 0.0002; infection control group = 0.0014). *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001. Results of two independent samples for each
group are used for each respective day, with three technical replicates. B Shannon index (alpha diversity indicator). Unpaired Student t-test was performed
to compare the Shannon index between day 1 and day 3. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.005. Results of two independent samples for each group are used
for each respective day, with three technical replicates. C Histological Injury Scores (HISs) of colon tissues were assessed in a blind fashion. The infection
severity based on the score is indicated by dotted lines. Mann–Whitney test was performed (outlier (*) was excluded for analysis). *P < 0.05 (p value for
no-infection control and treatment = 0.036; no-infection and wild-type = 0.024; infection and treatment = 0.036). The numbers of independent samples
for each group are no-infection control group, n = 3; for all other groups, n = 6. D Representative microscopic images of H&E-stained colon tissue from
each group were assessed. Submucosal oedema (*) and neutrophil inﬁltration (arrow) were identiﬁed. The scale bar corresponds to 100 µm. Source data
are provided as a Source Data ﬁle, and the black bars indicate the means and SEMs of the groups.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

work presents a targeted microbiome-modulation strategy that
harnesses the host–pathogen microenvironment as the intervention target to limit the pathogenesis of infection. We based this
strategy for CDI on several ﬁndings from prior studies. First, the
intestinal microbiome modiﬁes bile salt proﬁles9,15–17. Second,
microbiome dysbiosis caused by antibiotic treatment disrupts
intestinal bile salt metabolism6,7,13. Third, the dysregulation of
microbiome-mediated bile salt metabolism results in an imbalance in the proﬁle of bile salts, contributing to CDI and
rCDI7,9,12. This imbalance in the host–pathogen microenvironment was the primary intervention target for our work, in which
probiotics were genetically modiﬁed to aid in the restoration of
intestinal bile salt metabolism in response to antibiotic-induced
microbiome dysbiosis.
Our work suggests that modulation of bile salt metabolism can
serve as a mechanism of action for the development of therapeutics
against CDI, supporting prior propositions of the use of a germination/sporulation-based strategy for CDI treatment17,18,37. We
have provided evidence that the dynamic expression of bile salt
hydrolase can signiﬁcantly inhibit CDI in vivo. We hypothesise that
this inhibition is aided by the rebuilding of intestinal bile salt
metabolism, which promotes the prevention of spore germination
and the restoration of microbiome colonisation resistance9,17.
Recent clinical practice guidelines for CDI recommend faecal
microbiota transplantation (FMT)39, which facilitates the restoration of the pre-morbid state of the microbiome, for patients with
rCDI25,40,41. This recommendation signiﬁes the importance of
therapeutic mechanisms that mediate the repopulation of the
normal colonic microbiome for CDI treatment. Our work substantiates the value of the regulation of bile salt metabolism among
such therapeutic mechanisms.
The in vitro and in vivo efﬁcacy of the engineered probiotics
demonstrated in this work suggests the potential utility of several
therapeutic regimens. First, the engineered probiotics can serve as
adjuvants to standard antibiotic therapy against CDI, assisting
antibiotics in inhibiting and killing vegetative, virulent C. difﬁcile
Fig. 7 The engineered probiotics modify bile salt composition in the host gut. A Timeline of sample collection for metabolite examination in relation to
the animal experiment timeline. B Quantiﬁcation of sialic acid in faecal samples during antibiotic-containing water treatment. Paired Student’s t-test was
performed to compare the day −6 and day -3 data (p = 0.0027). **P < 0.01. The black bars indicate the means and SEMs of the groups. n = 3 independent
samples. C Quantiﬁcation of (i) taurocholate and (ii) cholate in faecal samples prior to C. difﬁcile challenge from day −6 to 0 in the EcN-Cbh and infection
control groups (“No probiotic”). ND not detected. Unpaired Student’s t-test was performed between the EcN-Cbh and infection control groups for
taurocholate on day −1 (p = 0.0507) and cholate on day −3 (p = 0.0056). **P < 0.01. The black bars indicate the means and SEMs of the groups. n = 3
independent samples. D Quantiﬁcation of (i) taurocholate and (ii) cholate in faecal samples collected from day −1 to day 3 from each group. Mixed-model
ANOVA was performed to compare groups (p value for taurocholate for no-sensor control group = 0.1362; no-ampliﬁer control group = 0.1117; noactuator control group = 0.0152; wild-type control group <0.0001; infection control group = 0.0051; for cholate for no-sensor control group = 0.8709; noampliﬁer control group = 0.2829; no-actuator control group = 0.0002; wild-type control group = 0.0001; infection control group <0.0001). *P < 0.05;
**P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001. The black bars indicate the means and SEMs of the groups and days. LOD limit of detection. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9

cells while preventing further germination of C. difﬁcile spores.
Notably, our engineered probiotics, which are gram-negative bacteria, can withstand the standard CDI antibiotic therapy that
includes vancomycin, therefore enabling co-administration. This
combination therapy may enhance the efﬁcacy of antibiotic therapy
against CDI, which disrupts the intestinal microbiome and bile salt
metabolism. Second, the engineered probiotics can be administered
to patients at high risk who are to undergo antibiotic therapy to
prevent the potential onset of C. difﬁcile infection. This probiotic
administration could continue during and following antibiotic
therapy, enabling the normal microbiome to repopulate the
intestine, and offering protection against CDI.
It is of particular interest that the complete circuit, which
comprises the sensor, ampliﬁer, and actuator, was required for
signiﬁcant infection reduction (i.e., a 100% survival rate and
improvement of clinical symptoms) in the model mice in the
current study. From this result, we make several inferences. First,
sensor-controlled regulation of bile salt hydrolase was advantageous to infection control. The genetically encoded sensor
developed in our work was shown in vitro to respond dynamically to sialic acid, a proxy signal for microbiome dysbiosis whose
levels were elevated upon antibiotic treatment in our murine
model. We conjecture that the levels and spatial distribution of
sialic acid in the model mice dynamically controlled the extent of
the modulation by the hydrolase-harbouring actuator of the circuit in a spatial-speciﬁc manner. This dynamic and spatialspeciﬁc modulation might have been augmented by the sensor
element (pNanA) and the ampliﬁer element (cadC), where
additional regulation by glucose and pH was applied, as stated
above. The critical role of the sensor in the circuit was also evidenced by the result that the no-sensor control led to the lowest
survival rate despite the constitutive expression of hydrolase,
which might have imposed an additional metabolic burden on the
probiotic host. This critical role is corroborated by the result that
the sensor was required for hydrolase-expressing probiotics to
increase the microbiome diversity in the model mice upon CDI.
Second, our ﬁnding that all the control groups except the noampliﬁer control group exhibited survival rates signiﬁcantly lower
than that of the infection control supports prior ﬁndings that
probiotic administration can impair gut microbiome recovery by
prolonging microbiome dysbiosis42. Third, both the adequate
expression level of hydrolase and its controlled regulation are
signiﬁcant factors in ensuring the efﬁcacy of our engineered
probiotics against CDI. Only the complete circuit, which provided
both the ampliﬁed and sensor-controlled expression of hydrolase,
improved the survival rate and clinical symptoms and decreased
the abundance of C. difﬁcile in the model mice.
This study has several limitations. First, although hydrolase
expression
and
the
taurocholate-to-cholate
conversion
was
strongly correlated in the model mice, neither was linearly correlated with the extent of infection inhibition except in the
complete circuit group, which showed the most improved survival rate and clinical symptoms. For instance, the no-sensor
control, which constitutively expressed hydrolase, led to a
taurocholate-to-cholate conversion comparable to that of the
complete circuit but resulted in a low survival rate and a high
CSS. Second, the ﬁnding that the complete circuit was a prerequisite for CDI protection indicates the need for a next-level
understanding of the mechanisms of the protection and the
interplay between the modules of the circuit for clinical translation. This mechanistic elucidation also entails the testing of the
circuits for other C. difﬁcile strains, in particular, in the spore
form. Third, it is plausible that hydrolase-mediated deconjugation
by our engineered probiotics shifted the proﬁles of other intestinal metabolites, which might have helped limit the infection.
Future research could examine a complete set of intestinal
metabolites and microbes that contribute to anti-germination and
infection inhibition as well as determine the appropriate dosage
and duration for the engineered probiotics.
In conclusion, we propose that the mechanism of action of the
antimicrobial strategy presented in this work, which modulates the
host–pathogen microenvironment for infection control rather than
exerting direct lethality, should be considered for the development
of future microbiome-based antimicrobial therapeutics.
Methods
Culture and maintenance. All E. coli strains were maintained in Luria broth (LB)
medium at 37 °C with appropriate antibiotics and/or supplements unless stated
otherwise (ﬁnal concentrations: 30 mg/L kanamycin and 50 mg/L D-alanine).
Cloning was performed with E. coli Top10 (Invitrogen), heterologous protein
expression was performed with E. coli BL21 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and
characterisation was performed with a modiﬁed E. coli Nissle 1917 EcN strain22. C.
difﬁcile culture was carried out in a Coy Lab Vinyl Anaerobic Chamber and
anaerobic jar to maintain anaerobic conditions. Cells were cultured in brain heart
infusion-supplemented (BHIS) medium supplemented with 5% w/v yeast extract
and 0.03% w/v L-cysteine. Taurocholate was supplemented as necessary. The cells
were incubated anaerobically at 37 °C. C. difﬁcile CD630, VPI10463, BAA1870 and
9689 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The
Caco-2 cell line (ATCC) was maintained in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 20% foetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (10000 U/mL). The cells were incubated at 37 °C under a 5% CO2/95% air
atmosphere. Cell passage was performed at ~70 to 90% conﬂuence.
C. difﬁcile endospore germination efﬁciency assay and vegetative cell growth
assay. C. difﬁcile endospores were extracted by resuspending C. difﬁcile CD630
following 6 days of incubation in 50% v/v ethanol/PBS for 1 h. The cells were then
washed twice in PBS before incubation at 70 °C for 20 min and resuspended in PBS
with 1% w/v bovine serum albumin (BSA). The extracted endospores were counted
under anaerobic conditions for CFU determination by tenfold serial dilution on BHIS
agar containing 2 mM taurocholate, unless otherwise stated13. The endospores were
diluted in PBS with 1% w/v BSA to a ﬁnal concentration of ~106/mL and then
counted under anaerobic conditions for CFU determination on BHIS plates containing bile salts at concentrations ranging from 1 to 5 mM. To assess endospore
germination efﬁciency or vegetative cell growth with Cbh-treated or engineered EcNtreated taurocholate, puriﬁed 10 μM Cbh or engineered EcN at an optical density at
600 nm wavelength (OD600) of 0.5 was incubated with 10 mM taurocholate for 3 h
before the addition of C. difﬁcile endospores or vegetative cells. The bile salt reaction
mixture was diluted ﬁve times to achieve a ﬁnal 2 mM bile salt concentration and
incubated anaerobically with endospores at a ﬁnal concentration of ~106/mL for 1 h
or with vegetative C. difﬁcile at an OD600 of 0.2 (~2 × 107 CFU/mL) for 12 h. C.
difﬁcile were then counted for CFU determination under anaerobic conditions on
BHIS agar. All assays were performed in triplicate unless stated otherwise.
Molecular cloning and protein expression. The BglBrick standard was used in
the design and cloning of biological parts43. Cloning was performed with a pEaaK
vector22. The Cbh gene was codon-optimised for expression in E. coli and synthesised with the addition of a C-terminal hexahistidine tag (IDT Technologies).
Cbh was expressed and puriﬁed through immobilised metal ion afﬁnity chromatography (IMAC) with nickel-charged agarose resins followed by size exclusion
chromatography on a HiLoad 16/600 Superdex 75 pg column (GE Healthcare Life
Sciences). Selected fractions were then concentrated with ultraﬁltration columns at
a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) in protein buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl,
100 mM NaCl, 10% v/v glycerol, pH 8.0).
Characterisation of bile salt deconjugation activity. Bile salts were detected with
a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. To assay protein
activity, 10 μM puriﬁed Cbh was incubated with 10 mM taurocholate in protein
buffer at 37 °C for 3 h. Four volumes of methanol were then added to precipitate
the proteins. The mixture was dried by a vacuum concentrator, resuspended in
70% v/v acetonitrile, and subjected to HPLC analysis. For assays involving probiotics, the cells were pre-induced with 0.2% w/v sialic acid for 3 h at 37 °C,
adjusted to an OD600 of 3.0 and further incubated with 10 mM taurocholate for 3 h.
The supernatants were then collected for quantiﬁcation of the bile acids using
UPLC-electrospray ionisation (ESI)-tandem MS (MS/MS) in negative ionisation
mode with an Eclipse Plus C18 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.8 µm particle size)
(Agilent Technologies). (See ‘Liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry
(MS) quantiﬁcation of faecal bile salts’ for further details).
Growth and protein expression assay. Cells or constructs were characterised
with growth assays or ﬂuorescent protein expression assays on a Synergy H1
Multimode plate reader (BioTek). All assays were performed in triplicate unless
stated otherwise. The absorbance of the cell culture at a 600 nm wavelength
(OD600) was read to indicate the cell density. Green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

ﬂuorescence (excitation: 485 nm, emission: 528 nm) in the sample medium relative
to the blank medium was read to indicate GFP expression. The initial cell densities
(OD600 values) of pre-cultures at the early exponential phase were adjusted to an
absorbance of 0.2 prior to microtitre plate reading. Then, 200 µL of culture was
added to each well of a clear-bottom 96-well microtitre plate along with a blank
medium for background reading normalisation and water for pathlength normalisation. Appropriate chemicals were added accordingly for induction of cells
(ﬁnal concentrations: 0.2% w/v sialic acid, 0.2% w/v L-arabinose, and 20 mM glucose). The microtitre plates were incubated at 37 °C and agitated at 225 rpm with
orbital shaking in the plate reader. Cbh expression was conﬁrmed in an immunoblot using an anti-His tag antibody conjugated with HRP at 1:1000 dilution
(#9991 S, Cell Signaling Technology).
Flow cytometry characterisation of protein expression. Fluorescent protein
expression under multiple inducer concentrations was characterised on an Accuri C6
ﬂow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). The initial cell densities (OD600 values) of precultures at the early exponential phase were adjusted to an absorbance of 0.2. Then,
200 µL of culture was added to each well of a 96-well microtitre plate. Appropriate
chemicals were added accordingly for induction of cells (ﬁnal concentrations: 0.05 to
0.2% w/v sialic acid and 0.00001 to 0.1% w/v L-arabinose). The cultures were incubated at 37 °C for 12 h with agitation at 1000 rpm. The cells were then diluted 100
times in water and sampled with a ﬂow cytometer. Ten thousand size-gated samples
were taken for each experiment, and the median ﬂuorescence reading was quantiﬁed.
C. difﬁcile toxin extraction and coculture assay. Engineered EcN-treated bile salt
supernatants were collected as previously described. The supernatants were diluted
ﬁve times with BHIS and then incubated anaerobically with C. difﬁcile endospores
(106/mL) at 37 °C. Supernatants of the coculture were collected at regular intervals
and concentrated ten times using speedvac vacuum concentrator (Savant SpeedVac™, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc), and the buffer was exchanged for protein buffer
(50 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, pH 8.0) with 50 kDa MWCO ultraﬁltration
columns. The concentrated supernatants were probed with 500 μg/L anti-TcdA
antibody (PCG4, ab19953, Abcam) and anti-mouse IgG conjugated to HRP at
1:2000 dilution (#7076, Cell Signaling Technology) in an immunoblot assay. Direct
coculture of Caco-2 cells and C. difﬁcile was not possible due to the differences in
laboratory growth conditions. An indirect coculture assay was performed by
incubating concentrated supernatants from C. difﬁcile with Caco-2 cells. Caco-2
cells with passage numbers between 16 and 20 were used for the assay. Cells
(5 × 104/mL) in 100 µL of culture medium were seeded in each well of clear-bottom
96-well microtitre plates. The cells were allowed to proliferate for 48 h at 37 °C.
Fresh complete medium without antibiotics was provided, and concentrated
supernatants were added to the Caco-2 cells. The supernatant was concentrated
tenfold and then dilute ten times in Caco-2 growth media to achieve a ﬁnal concentration equivalent to one time of the C. difﬁcile culture during which sufﬁcient
growth medium required for Caco-2 growth was maintained. The tenfoldconcentrated supernatants were diluted to ﬁnal concentrations of 1-fold, 0.1-fold or
0.01-fold in the cell medium in duplicate. The cells were further incubated for 48 h
before viability assessment with a methylthiazolyldiphenyl-tetrazolium bromide
(MTT) assay. The OD570 value (formazan signal) and the OD630 value (reference
signal) were read on a plate reader. The relative cell viability compared to that of
untreated Caco-2 cells is reported.
CDI animal models. All procedures were conducted under Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines and in conformity with protocols
approved by the NUS IACUC (R18–0329) and all relevant ethical regulations. The
CDI mouse model has been previously reported34. Male C57BL/6 mice (5–6 weeks
old) were provided with an antibiotic cocktail in water (0.4 mg/mL kanamycin,
0.035 mg/mL gentamicin, 850 U/mL colistin, 0.215 mg/mL metronidazole, 0.045 mg/
mL vancomycin) for 3 days following acclimatisation (day -6 to -3; pre-infection). A
dose of clindamycin (10 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally on day −1.
Infection with C. difﬁcile VPI10463 (107 CFU of vegetative cells) was performed on
day 0 through oral gavage. The mice were maintained on a complex carbohydratefree diet (D15091702Bi AIN-93G, Research Inc.). Probiotics (109 CFU) were provided through oral gavage on day −3 as necessary. The animals were monitored up to
day 9 postinfection, under standard housing conditions (12 light/12 dark cycle,
22–24 °C with humidity set at 40–50%). Symptoms were scored with a standardised
CSS system as described previously38. Brieﬂy, the scoring was based on three major
symptoms observed in humans: behavioural changes, stool characteristics and weight
loss. Each category of the CSS system was scored from 0 to 4, and individual scores
were added to provide an overall severity score. Kaplan-Meier survival curves were
generated and analysed with the log-rank test using GraphPad Prism.
Microbiome sequencing and analysis. Metagenomic DNA was extracted from
faecal samples with the Zymobiomics DNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research).
Metagenomic libraries were prepared by amplifying the V3-V4 region of prokaryotes 16 s rRNA44, and then indexed with Illumina XT Index Kit v2. The puriﬁed
indexed libraries were quantiﬁed using KAPA Library Quantiﬁcation Kit (Roche)
and the quality of the amplicons was measured in an Agilent Tapestation (Agilent
Technologies). The pooled libraries were sequenced in an Illumina Miseq platform
with Miseq Reagent Kit v2. Sequencing reads were demultiplexed and were analysed using the QIIME245 workﬂow for 16 S amplicons. the demultiplexed reads
were quality-checked, denoised and ﬁltered for chimera to output the representative sequences and OTU table. The Greengenes database (v13_8) was used as
a training set for the taxonomy assignment of the OTUs46. Microbiome 16 s rRNA
sequencing data generated in this study have been deposited in the Sequence Read
Archive (SRA) under accession code PRJNA844050.
Histopathological analysis of animal tissue. Colon tissues were collected from
animals, ﬁxed with 10% formalin solution, and then processed for parafﬁn
embedding. Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed on sectioned
slides, and then the HIS was determined according to a standardised protocol38 by
a pathologist who was blinded to the treatment information. Images were captured
on Leica DMi8 Inverted Microscope.
Derivation of sialic acid for HPLC detection. Faecal samples were collected and
homogenised in water. The homogenised samples were ﬁltered and resuspended in
7 mM 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene dihydrochloride (DMB), 0.75 M βmercaptoethanol and 18 mM sodium hydrosulﬁte in 1.4 M acetic acid. The samples
were incubated in the dark at 50 °C for 2.5 h and then analysed by reverse-phase
HPLC with an octadecyl silica Inertsil ODS-3 column (4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 µm
particle size) (GL Sciences). A 5 μL aliquot was injected into the column. The run
was performed at a ﬂow rate of 0.9 mL/min with linear gradient elution at 5:88:7 to
20:73:7 v/v/v acetonitrile:water:methanol solvent until a run time of 15 min, isocratic elution at 20:73:7 until a run time of 18 min, gradient elution to 80:13:7 until
a run time of 19 min, isocratic elution at 80:13:7 until a run time of 22 min,
gradient elution to 5:88:7 until a run time of 23 min, and ﬁnal recalibration at
5:88:7 for 3 min. The derivatised samples were detected under 373 nm excitation
and 448 nm emission with a ﬂuorescence detector. Sialic acid was eluted at
approximately 13.4 min. Standard curves were constructed based on the areas of
the corresponding elution peaks in the elution spectra.
Liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS) quantiﬁcation of faecal
bile salts. Faecal samples were collected and homogenised in Zymobiomics DNA
miniprep lysis buffer (Zymo Research). Ten microlitres of the homogenised mixture
was mixed with 90 uL of LC-MS grade methanol and ﬁltered through a 0.2 µm
syringe PTFE ﬁlter for organic solutions (Millipore). Quantiﬁcation of the bile acids
was performed in a UPLC-electrospray ionisation (ESI)-tandem MS (MS/MS) in
negative ionisation mode with an Eclipse Plus C18 column (2.1 mm × 100 mm,
1.8 µm particle size) (Agilent Technologies). Ten microlitres of the samples were
injected into the column with mobile phases A and B consisting of 0.1% formic acid
in 7.5 mM ammonium acetate in water and 7.5 mM ammonium acetate in acetonitrile, respectively. The separation of the analytes was performed at a ﬂow rate of
0.25 mL/min with a gradient at 40%B from 0 to 5 min, 100%B from 5 to 7 min and
back to 40%B for 3 min. The gas temperature was set to 250 °C at a ﬂow of 15 L/min,
and the sheath temperature to 400 °C at 12 L/min. Capillary and nozzle voltages were
set at 3500 and 2000 V, respectively. The bile acids were detected using the following
multiple reaction monitoring conditions: cholic acid (m/z 407→341, collision energy
36 V), chenodeoxycholic acid (m/z 391→391, CE 30 V); deoxycholic acid (m/z
391→345, CE 36 V); glycocholic acid (m/z 464→74, CE 36 V), lithocholic acid (m/z
375→375, CE 30 V) and taurocholic acid (m/z 514→80, CE 64 V). The gas temperature was set to 250 °C at a ﬂow of 15 L/min, and the sheath temperature to 400 °C
at 12 L/min. Mass spectrometry data will be provided upon request.
Statistics and reproducibility. All in vitro experiments conducted on 96-well
microtitre plates, with the exception of the ﬂow cytometry and MTT assays, were
performed in triplicate. All in vitro CFU and HPLC experiments were performed in
triplicates unless stated otherwise. Immunoblot assays were repeated independently
thrice and representative blots were shown. Sample sizes for the animal study were
selected based on a previous study35. Histology samples were determined by a
pathologist who was blinded to the treatment information. One image was captured for each histology slide and the representative was selected. All reported error
bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM) values unless stated otherwise.
The student’s t-test was performed for statistical analysis of bile salt quantities,
germination assay results, growth, and metabolite quantities. Standard curves for
HPLC and LC-MS analysis were generated by the linear regression method. The
log-rank Mantel–Cox test was performed to analyse animal survival, Dunnett’s
multiple comparisons test was performed to analyse the animal CSS, and mixedmodel ANOVA was performed to analyse the taurocholate and cholate quantiﬁcation. Microsoft Excel, Graphpad Prism and SPSS were used for data analysis.
Reporting Summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Microbiome 16 s rRNA sequencing data that support the ﬁndings of this study have been
deposited in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) under accession code PRJNA844050. All
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11

other data supporting the ﬁndings of this study are available within the article and
its supplementary information ﬁles. Source data are provided with this paper.
Received: 21 February 2022; Accepted: 14 June 2022;
References
1.
Balsells, E. et al. Global burden of Clostridium difﬁcile infections: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J. Glob. Health 9, 010407 (2019).
2.
Guh, A. Y. et al. Trends in U.S. burden of Clostridioides difﬁcile infection and
outcomes. N. Engl. J. Med. 382, 1320–1330 (2020).
3.
Tay, H. L., Chow, A., Ng, T. M. & Lye, D. C. Risk factors and treatment
outcomes of severe Clostridioides difﬁcile infection in Singapore. Sci. Rep. 9,
13440 (2019).
4.
Dubberke, E. R. & Olsen, M. A. Burden of Clostridium difﬁcile on the
healthcare system. Clin. Infect. Dis. 55, S88–S92 (2012).
5.
Heimann, S. M., Cruz Aguilar, M. R., Mellinghof, S. & Vehreschild, M.
Economic burden and cost-effective management of Clostridium difﬁcile
infections. Med Mal. Infect. 48, 23–29 (2018).
6.
Petrosillo, N. Tackling the recurrence of Clostridium difﬁcile infection. Med
Mal. Infect. 48, 18–22 (2018).
7.
Crobach, M. J. T. et al. Understanding Clostridium difﬁcile Colonization. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00021-17 (2018).
8.
Gebhart, D. et al. A modiﬁed R-type bacteriocin speciﬁcally targeting
Clostridium difﬁcile prevents colonization of mice without affecting gut
microbiota diversity. mBio https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.02368-14 (2015).
9.
Sorg, J. A. & Sonenshein, A. L. Bile salts and glycine as cogerminants for
Clostridium difﬁcile spores. J. Bacteriol. 190, 2505–2512 (2008).
10. Carter, G. P. et al. Deﬁning the roles of TcdA and TcdB in localized
gastrointestinal disease, systemic organ damage, and the host response during
Clostridium difﬁcile infections. mBio 6, e00551 (2015).
11. Nusrat, A. et al. Clostridium difﬁcile toxins disrupt epithelial barrier function
by altering membrane microdomain localization of tight junction proteins.
Infect. Immun. 69, 1329–1336 (2001).
12. Bufﬁe, C. G. et al. Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid
mediated resistance to Clostridium difﬁcile. Nature 517, 205–208 (2015).
13. Theriot, C. M., Bowman, A. A. & Young, V. B. Antibiotic-induced alterations
of the gut microbiota alter secondary bile acid production and allow for
Clostridium difﬁcile spore germination and outgrowth in the large intestine.
mSphere https://doi.org/10.1128/mSphere.00045-15 (2016).
14. Kakiyama, G. et al. A simple and accurate HPLC method for fecal bile acid
proﬁle in healthy and cirrhotic subjects: validation by GC-MS and LC-MS. J.
Lipid Res. 55, 978–990 (2014).
15. Begley, M., Gahan, C. G. & Hill, C. The interaction between bacteria and bile.
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 29, 625–651 (2005).
16. Ridlon, J. M., Kang, D. J. & Hylemon, P. B. Bile salt biotransformations by
human intestinal bacteria. J. Lipid Res. 47, 241–259 (2006).
17. Zhu, D., Sorg, J. A. & Sun, X. Clostridioides difﬁcile biology: sporulation,
germination, and corresponding therapies for C. difﬁcile infection. Front. Cell
Infect. Microbiol. 8, 29 (2018).
18. Funabashi, M. et al. A metabolic pathway for bile acid dehydroxylation by the
gut microbiome. Nature 582, 566–570 (2020).
19. Ng, K. M. et al. Microbiota-liberated host sugars facilitate post-antibiotic
expansion of enteric pathogens. Nature 502, 96–99 (2013).
20. Hamilton, J. P. et al. Human cecal bile acids: concentration and spectrum. Am.
J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 293, G256–G263 (2007).
21. Coleman, J. P. & Hudson, L. L. Cloning and characterization of a conjugated
bile acid hydrolase gene from Clostridium perfringens. Appl Environ.
Microbiol. 61, 2514–2520 (1995).
22. Hwang, I. Y. et al. Engineered probiotic Escherichia coli can eliminate and
prevent Pseudomonas aeruginosa gut infection in animal models. Nat.
Commun. 8, 15028 (2017).
23. Praveschotinunt, P. et al. Engineered E. coli Nissle 1917 for the delivery of
matrix-tethered therapeutic domains to the gut. Nat. Commun. 10, 5580
(2019).
24. Ho, C. L. et al. Engineered commensal microbes for diet-mediated colorectalcancer chemoprevention. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 27–37 (2018).
25. Chilton, C. H., Pickering, D. S. & Freeman, J. Microbiologic factors affecting
Clostridium difﬁcile recurrence. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 24, 476–482 (2018).
26. Huang, Y. L., Chassard, C., Hausmann, M., von Itzstein, M. & Hennet, T.
Sialic acid catabolism drives intestinal inﬂammation and microbial dysbiosis
in mice. Nat. Commun. 6, 8141 (2015).
27. McDonald, N. D., Lubin, J. B., Chowdhury, N. & Boyd, E. F. Host-derived
sialic acids are an important nutrient source required for optimal bacterial
ﬁtness in vivo. mBio 7, e02237–02215 (2016).
28. Severi, E., Hood, D. W. & Thomas, G. H. Sialic acid utilization by bacterial
pathogens. Microbiology 153, 2817–2822 (2007).
29. Kalivoda, K. A., Steenbergen, S. M., Vimr, E. R. & Plumbridge, J. Regulation of
sialic acid catabolism by the DNA binding protein NanR in Escherichia coli. J.
Bacteriol. 185, 4806–4815 (2003).
30. Ferraris, R. P., Yasharpour, S., Lloyd, K. C., Mirzayan, R. & Diamond, J. M.
Luminal glucose concentrations in the gut under normal conditions. Am. J.
Physiol. 259, G822–G837 (1990).
31. Watson, N., Dunyak, D. S., Rosey, E. L., Slonczewski, J. L. & Olson, E. R.
Identiﬁcation of elements involved in transcriptional regulation of the
Escherichia coli cad operon by external pH. J. Bacteriol. 174, 530–540
(1992).
32. Maurer, J. M. et al. Gastrointestinal pH and transit time proﬁling in healthy
volunteers using the IntelliCap system conﬁrms ileo-colonic release of
ColoPulse tablets. PLoS One 10, e0129076 (2015).
33. Kishinaka, M., Umeda, A. & Kuroki, S. High concentrations of conjugated bile
acids inhibit bacterial growth of Clostridium perfringens and induce its
extracellular cholylglycine hydrolase. Steroids 59, 485–489 (1994).
34. Chen, X. et al. A mouse model of Clostridium difﬁcile-associated disease.
Gastroenterology 135, 1984–1992 (2008).
35. Sun, X. et al. Mouse relapse model of Clostridium difﬁcile infection. Infect.
Immun. 79, 2856–2864 (2011).
36. Hutton, M. L., Mackin, K. E., Chakravorty, A. & Lyras, D. Small animal
models for the study of Clostridium difﬁcile disease pathogenesis. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 352, 140–149 (2014).
37. Howerton, A., Patra, M. & Abel-Santos, E. A new strategy for the prevention
of Clostridium difﬁcile infection. J. Infect. Dis. 207, 1498–1504 (2013).
38. Shelby, R. D. et al. Development of a standardized scoring system to assess a
murine model of Clostridium difﬁcile colitis. J. Invest. Surg. 33, 887–895
(2020).
39. McDonald, L. C. et al. Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difﬁcile
infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of
America (SHEA). Clin. Infect. Dis. 66, 987–994 (2018).
40. Burke, K. E. & Lamont, J. T. Fecal transplantation for recurrent Clostridium
difﬁcile infection in older adults: a review. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 61, 1394–1398
(2013).
41. Gough, E., Shaikh, H. & Manges, A. R. Systematic review of intestinal
microbiota transplantation (fecal bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium
difﬁcile infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 53, 994–1002 (2011).
42. Suez, J. et al. Post-antibiotic gut mucosal microbiome reconstitution is
impaired by probiotics and improved by autologous FMT. Cell 174,
1406–1423 e1416 (2018).
43. Anderson, J. C. et al. BglBricks: a ﬂexible standard for biological part assembly.
J. Biol. Eng. 4, 1 (2010).
44. Klindworth, A. et al. Evaluation of general 16S ribosomal RNA gene PCR
primers for classical and next-generation sequencing-based diversity studies.
Nucleic Acids Res. 41, e1 (2013).
45. Caporaso, J. G. et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community
sequencing data. Nat. Methods 7, 335–336 (2010).
46. DeSantis, T. Z. et al. Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database
and workbench compatible with ARB. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
5069–5072 (2006).
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. R. Ravisankar for his assistance in the histopathological assessment.
This work was supported by the Synthetic Biology Initiative of the National University
of Singapore (DPRT/943/09/14, M.W.C.), the Summit Research Programme of the
National University Health System (NUHSRO/2016/053/SRP/05, M.W.C.), NUS
Medicine Synthetic Biology Translational Research Programme (NUHSRO/2020/077/
MSC/02/SB, M.W.C.), Investigatorship of the National Research Foundation of Singapore (NRF-NRFI05-2019-0004, M.W.C.), ISF-NRF Joint Programme of the
National Research Foundation of Singapore (NRF2019-NRF-ISF003-3208, I.Y.H.), the
Ministry of Education of Singapore (NUHSRO/2020/046/T1/3, M.W.C.) and the U.S.
Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research—Asian Ofﬁce of Aerospace Research and
Development (FA2386-18-1-4058, M.W.C.). This work used the resources of the
Singapore BioFoundry, a bio-manufacturing research facility located at the National
University of Singapore.
Author contributions
E.K., I.Y.H. and M.W.C. conceived, designed and performed the study and wrote the
manuscript. E.K., I.Y.H., H.L.L, R.D.S., J.W.J.L., Y.S.L., J.C.M. and M.W.C. analysed the
data. J.W.J.L., Y.S.L. and J.C.M. edited the manuscript. M.W.C. obtained funding and
supervised the study. All authors critically reviewed the manuscript and approved the
ﬁnal version of the manuscript for submission.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
12
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications

Competing interests
E.K., I.Y.H. and M.W.C. have ﬁled a provisional patent application (application number
17/599,998 submitted by the National University of Singapore) based on the work
described in this manuscript. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Matthew Wook
Chang.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Robert Britton, Cesar de la
Fuente and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of
this work. Peer reviewer reports are available.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2022
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2022) 13:3834 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31334-z | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
13