======================================================================
论文信息提取结果
======================================================================

【源文件】1-s2.0-S2590097825000023-main.pdf

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【标题 / Title】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Potential therapeutic solution for Clostridioides difficile infection: Current scenario and future prospects Medicine in Microecology

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【DOI】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1016/j.medmic.2025.100121

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【摘要 / Abstract】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[未识别到摘要]

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【全文 / Full Text】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Potential therapeutic solution for Clostridioides difficile infection: Current
scenario and future prospects
Chandrashekhar Singh a, Anjali Singh b, Deepjyoti Singh c, Richa Upadhyay d,*
a Maharishi School of Science and Humanities, Maharishi University of Information Technology, Lucknow, 226013, Uttar Pradesh, India
b Laboratory of Cell Cycles of Algae, Centre Algatech, Institute of Microbiology of Czech Academy of Sciences, Novaradaska, 23737981, Trebon, Czech Republic
c Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, North Carolina State University, USA
d Department of Botany, Mihir Bhoj PG College, Dadri, GB Nagar, 203207, Uttar Pradesh, India
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Gut microbiota
Polyphenols
Fecal microbiota transplant
Antibiotics
C. difficile
A B S T R A C T
Clostridioides difficile previously known as Clostridium difficile is one of the three most potent human pathogens
associated with antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and damage to the colon. Although advanced healthcare facilities
with the development of new antibiotics are now available, these are associated with either treatment failure or
disease recurrence. Any reason that disturbs the microbiome such as antibiotic treatment, unbalanced diet, stress
and chronic disease may allow C. difficile, to adhere, colonize, grow and reproduce and eventually cause disease
recurrence. With increasing knowledge about the natural defence mechanism of microbiome against gut path­
ogens, interest in non-antibiotic alternatives like prebiotics, synbiotics, probiotics, and postbiotics is quickly
evolving. The gut microenvironment can be suitably modified by using prebiotics and probiotics either alone or
by using their mixture as synbiotics. The gut microbiome prevents pathogen adhesion either by physical
competition or by the proliferation of anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial products. Besides, there are other
possible methods such as faecal matter transplantation (FMT) and microbiome replacement therapies (MRT) for
the repopulation of the gastrointestinal tract. In this article, we review current treatment strategies for C. difficile
infection (CDI) using prebiotics, probiotics, synbiotics, postbiotic FMT, and MRT. The article will give useful
insight into the current therapies of CDI and their future developments.
1. Introduction
Clostridioides difficile is an anaerobic and gram-positive bacterium
which linked with array of diseases like diarrhoea to fulminant colitis
[1]. C. difficile infection (CDI) reduces the biodiversity of the gut biome
and causes intestinal dysbiosis. CDI is a major health issue across the
globe
associated
with
increased
morbidity,
mortality,
and
healthcare-associated infection (HAI). C. difficile primarily elicit the
disease by the production of two types of toxins such as TcdA and TcdB
that upon endocytosis into the colon, inactivate host GTPases, and
disrupt the cytoskeleton and neutrophilic influx, which eventually
causes cell apoptosis and necrosis [2]. The rigorous healthcare facilities
and appropriate antibiotic treatment are the best treatment options for
CDI [3,4]. Despite antibiotics being the preliminary treatment strategies
for CDI, they are associated with several side effects. Antibiotics like
vancomycin or fidaxomicin are significantly used for the treatment of
CDI, however, several case relapses have been found after treatment [5,
6]. The indigenous gut microbiome provides resistance against
C. difficile colonization; but antibiotic treatment disrupts the micro­
biome and increases susceptibility to CDI [7,8]. The symbiotic in­
teractions between resident microbes and the gastrointestinal tract (GIT)
play a very significant role in gut homeostasis. However, antibiotic
abuse, nutritional choices, and other variables are thought to contribute
to gut dysbiosis. Therefore, it is prudent to identify alternatives (non-­
antibiotics) for the treatment of CDI. In a recent study by
V´azquez-Cuesta et al., the researchers aimed to investigate the role of
the microbiome as a predictive biomarker for CDI. A total of 753 samples
from 657 patients were analyzed, including 247 from patients with CDI,
43 from patients colonized with C. difficile, 63 from healthy individuals,
324 from patients without CDI (NOCDI), and 76 from patients with
recurrent CDI (R-CDI). The study revealed significant differences in both
alpha and beta diversity, as well as in taxonomic abundance across these
groups. Several genera were identified as key biomarkers for CDI (Bac­
teroides, Proteus, Paraprevotella, Robinsoniella), R-CDI (Veillonella,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ru4004@gmail.com (R. Upadhyay).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Medicine in Microecology
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/medicine-in-microecology
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmic.2025.100121
Received 27 February 2024; Received in revised form 15 October 2024; Accepted 4 February 2025
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
Available online 6 February 2025
2590-0978/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).

Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus, Clostridium sensu stricto I), and C. difficile
colonization (Parabacteroides, Faecalicoccus, Flavonifractor, Clostridium
XVIII) [9].
Dietary therapies such as prebiotics and synbiotics have become
desirable for ensuring intestinal health and an ideal gut flora composi­
tion. Prebiotics are particularly utilized by the host for their health-
giving, while probiotics comprise live bacterium that can be beneficial
for their health when given in correct doses. Whereas synbiotics are a
mixture of probiotics and prebiotics which are good for human health.
Through microbial population shifts in the gut, synbiotics start making
short-chain fatty acids, which can promote defence against infections,
reduce inflammation, increase satiety, and improve bowel function [10,
11]. In this article, different strategies of protection against CDI used in
present scenarios such as prebiotics, synbiotics, probiotics, FMT, and
MBT and their prospects will be discussed in detail.
2. Gut microbiome and their role in human health
The gut microbiome plays crucial role to manage the body’s in­
flammatory response, metabolic processes, immunological activity, and
even neurological functions [12,13]. It produces vitamins, hormones,
and neurotransmitters and causes the breakdown of the dietary com­
ponents. The gut microbiome can also influence the host’s metabolic
pathways such as absorption and metabolism of nutrients, and synthesis
of metabolites. The gut of human beings compasses diverse group of
microorganisms such as archaea, bacteria, fungi, and viruses are pre­
sent. These microorganisms are responsible for maintaining gut health,
by regulating digestion, metabolism, and protection against infections
(Fig. 1). The composition of the microbiome is influenced by numerous
aspects such as diet, age, and health status. Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes
are the prevalent bacterial group present in the gut, whereas Actino­
bacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and Proteobacteria are also frequent [14,
15]. The most common species of microbiota reported in the gut are
Bifidobacterium spp., Bacteroides spp., Clostridium spp., Enterobacter spp.,
Enterococcus spp., Gemella spp., Megasphaera spp., Porphyromonas spp.,
Pseudomonas spp., Prevotella spp., Rothia spp., Ruminococcus spp.,
Streptococcus spp., Veillonella spp [16]. These microorganisms are usu­
ally commensal or mutualists and they primarily aid in regulating
metabolism, such as glucose fermentation which produces butyrate, as a
bioproduct that works as an essential form of energy for colonocytes.
Intestinal microbes also beneficially influence lipid metabolism. They
improve protein metabolism by using microbial proteinases and pepti­
dases. They are also necessary to produce different vitamins such as
vitamin B12, vitamin K, biotin, conjugated linoleic acids etc. They are
involved in the degradation of different polyphenols and convert bile
acids [17].
Many bacteria that are associated with the daily aspects of life can be
found in the digestive tract of a healthy individual [18]. The ecology and
function of gut bacteria are dynamic in infancy, but they stabilize
throughout childhood [19]. These acquired new gut microbiota influ­
ence the digestion and the immunologic responses of the host [20,21].
The gut microbiota changes gradually with age in response to devel­
oping immune systems [22]. Different environmental factors can also
disturb the gut microbiota and are a key indicator of long-term health.
The intestinal microbiome not only affects the gut rather it influences
every organ of the body via a variety of mechanisms [23]. The external
variables can modify the intestinal biome, which offers novel treatment
options for some ailments [24]. A healthy gut is necessary for energy
harvesting and proper body functions. Besides gut microbiome also af­
fects metabolic health, such as blood glucose level, blood pressure, and
atherosclerosis, neurological problems, behavioural and inflammatory
responses [25]. Recently, the gut microbiome has been considered for its
promising characteristic in epilepsy [26].
3. Imbalance in human GIT microbiota caused by C. difficile
C. difficile causes an infection in the colon and is associated with
several symptoms ranging from diarrhoea to potentially life-threatening
Fig. 1. Role of gut microbiota in human health.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
2

colon injury. C. difficile infection usually occurs after taking antibiotics,
which are extremely common medications whose nonspecific killing
action can reduce beneficial gut flora. Dysbiosis, a disruption of the
normal microbiome, is caused by several factors such as antibiotics use,
poor hygiene practices, and immunocompromised and immunosup­
pressed patients. Newborns and elderly people are more prone to CDI
due to their weaker immune systems [27]. Lastly, a diet having
high-sugar and fat can contribute to C. difficile growth in the gut. The
microbiome of the GIT is influenced by various factors like age,
dietary-intake, stress, chronic illness and antibiotic use [28].
3.1. Age
Human microbiome differs between cultures and geographical re­
gions. It also varies with age rather than remaining constant throughout
life. Age-related alterations in diet, lifestyle, and medications have key
impact on gut composition. The elderly people are at greater risk of
developing CDI infection due to decreased immunity and changes in
their gut microbiome composition [29,30].
3.2. Diet
The quality and quantity of food consumed are mainly responsible
for determining the composition of the gut microbiome [28]. Diet affects
the types of bacteria that colonize the GIT, their numbers, and the
overall microbial balance. A diet with highly processed foods, refined
carbohydrates, and saturated fats can minimize the microbial diversity
of the gut, while a diet rich with fiber, prebiotic foods, and probiotics
can increase the diversity and health of the microbial diversity of the
microbiota [31]. Since diet is a key factor for regulating gut composi­
tion, vegans, vegetarians, and omnivores have different microbiomes
[32,33].
3.3. Antibiotic use
Antibiotics, antacids, and other medications can change the gut
microbiome composition. Antibiotics can kill the good bacteria present
in the gut, while antacids can lower the amount of stomach acid, which
can affect the growth of certain bacteria [34,35].
3.4. Stress
Stress also affects the balance of the gut microenvironment [36,37].
Stress can lead to changes in eating habits, which further changes
microbiome composition. Stress can also affect the production of hor­
mones, which can affect the growth of microorganisms in the gut [38].
3.5. Chronic illness
People with chronic illnesses, such as cancer or human immunode­
ficiency virus (HIV), may be more susceptible to CDI due to changes in
their gut environment [39]. The composition of gut microbiota of
HIV-infected people has been extensively studied, and the study
revealed the significant changes in the composition. These findings
suggest that the gut microbiome may be responsible in the progression
of HIV, warranting further research into the biology of this relationship
[39].
A case study carried out in North Portugal hospital for five years
(2013–2018), individuals above 18 years and non-pregnant ladies were
included. Among all patients, 43.9 % had non-severe symptoms, 29.8 %
were with severe symptoms and 21.0 % possessed fulminant symptoms.
People having renal disease, high neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio, and fe­
males were at high risk for developing severe disease. 30-day all-cause
death was discovered in 15.8 % of the cases, whereas 90-day mortal­
ity was detected in 28.1 % of the cases [40].
4. Resistance mechanism of gut microbiome against C. difficile
The human gut microbiome resists pathogenic bacteria invasion
through different colonization resistance mechanisms [41,42].
Currently, increased attention is paid to understanding the mechanism
used by gut microorganisms to resist colonization of C. difficile (Fig. 2).
These microbiomes affect CDI either directly through competitive
exclusion or indirectly through the production of certain antimicrobial
substances bile acids or short-chain fatty acids (SCFA).
4.1. Competitive exclusion
Some beneficial bacteria (Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Enterococcus,
and Saccharomyces species) be a competitor to pathogens for crucial
resources like nutrients and attachment sites [43]. This competition
makes it more difficult to colonize and survive in the gut for the path­
ogen. These beneficial microbes inhibit the adhesion of C. difficile either
by co-aggregation with the latter or simply competing with them for
adhesion sites [44,45].
4.2. Production of antimicrobial compounds
Microbes present in the gut produce antimicrobial substances like
SCFA, that hinder the growth and colonization of pathogens [46,47]. A
study showed that the TcdA and TcdB toxins of C. difficile got inhibited
by metabolites produced by certain fungal and bacterial strains.
4.3. Stimulation of the immune system
The gut microbiome is closely intertwined with the immunity of host;
gut bacteria not only help educate immune cells, but their products can
both activate and suppress our immune response. The microbes reside in
the gut stimulate the immune system to recognize and attack invading
pathogens [48].
4.4. Modulation of the gut microenvironment
The gut microorganisms can alter the microbiome to make it less
hospitable to pathogenic bacteria. This includes changes to the pH, os­
molarity, and nutrient availability. Gut microbiota can use different
pathways to provide resistance against C. difficile colonization.
Biotransformation of primary bile acids and production of organic acids
decreases pH, which eventually inhibits C. difficile growth or spore
germination [49].
5. Treatment strategies for CDI
The imbalance of gut microflora caused by CDI can typically be
treated using antibiotics. Antibiotics that are usually prescribed include
metronidazole and vancomycin [50]. Antibiotic treatments are effective
in treating CDI, but antibiotic therapy can result in resistance develop­
ment. To address the issue of dysbiosis and its associated illnesses,
probiotics, synbiotics and prebiotics have been proposed as potential
therapeutic strategies. Probiotics are living microbes that are consumed
as supplements to restore gut health, while prebiotics promote the
development of beneficial microbes in the gut. Synbiotics a combined
source of probiotics and prebiotics can be used to treat CDI. The use of
the above three (pre, pro, and synbiotics) to replace or supplement
antibiotic therapy can be beneficial in managing CDIs. Alternative
treatments, such as FMT, MRT, and dietary changes, may also be useful
in the treatment of CDIs [51].
5.1. CDI treatment employing probiotic approaches
Because of its potential to modify gut microbiota, probiotic supple­
mentation is important for maintaining intestinal homeostasis.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
3

Supplementing with probiotics e.g., Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium
may assist to maintain the balance of microbes in the gut and decrease
the chances of the recurrence of CDIs [52,53]. Probiotics can also boost
immunity, and thereby guide the body to block the pathogens. Pro­
biotics reduce oxidative stress associated with inflammatory diseases.
Several findings support probiotics inhibiting pathogen growth and
toxicity (Table 1). The use of probiotics to stop the growth of C. difficile
has been assessed using various techniques [54,55]. Several studies
show that a few species of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium can reduce
C. difficile’s adherence to the epithelial cell line and mucus of the in­
testine [56,57]. Although there is little evidence on the potential
effectiveness of probiotics in CDI treatment, most clinical investigations
to date have concentrated on prevention. There are some cases where
probiotic combination together with any antibiotic prescriptions under
C. difficile outbreak, decreased the number of C. difficile cases [58]
(Table 1). According to meta-analysis studies, probiotics have continu­
ously
demonstrated
a
positive
function,
in
preventing
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD) in children [59,60]. Recently,
Lukasik et al. found a multispecies probiotic’s effectiveness in prevent­
ing AAD in children [61]. Therefore, using appropriate probiotic
composition in children receiving antibiotic treatment could be a pos­
sibility to reduce diarrhoea.
Meta-analysis has revealed the prospective of two bacterium
L. rhamnosus. and S. boulardii in the CDI treatment. Bifidobacteria su­
pernatants isolated from the gut of physically fit infants inhibited the
growth and adhesion of C. difficile to enterocytes [62]. Whereas the
consumption of B. bifidum modulated the gut environment in healthy
adults [63]. The mixture of different Lactobacillus species has been found
effective in many clinical trials. A probiotic capsule containing
four-strain of Lactobacillus improved diarrhoea in CDI patients [64]. The
intake of L. acidophilus, L. casei, and L. rhamnosus combination dimin­
ished the CDI up to 2.3 cases per ten thousand patients [65]. Similarly,
the CDI incidence among immunocompromised patients has been
reduced from 1.21 % to 0.11 % using L. plantarum [66]. Adjunct pro­
biotics containing L. bulgaricus, L. casei, and S. thermophiles prevented
the CDI risk by up to 17 % in patients receiving antibiotic treatment
[67]. These clinical trial findings emphasize the role of Lactobacillus
species as a nontoxic and effective probiotic in CDI prevention and their
recurrence. S. boulardii can also significantly help in restoring the
antibiotic-disrupted microbiome [68]. S. boulardii CNCM I-745 pro­
hibited the consequences and recurrence of CDIs in the hamster model
[69–71] (Table 1).
Besides the above species, some species of Bacteroides and Clostridium
are also used as prebiotic agents for the CDI treatment. B. fragilis strain
ZY-312 increased the beneficial microbe of the gut Akkermansia muci­
niphila, which prevents C. difficile colonization in the gut [72]. Similarly,
B. thetaiotaomicron increased the population of useful bacteria Bacter­
oidetes, Proteobacteria and Verruco microbiota and suppressed the
C. difficile in the gut [73]. Nonetheless, more clinical trials are essential
to confirm the effectiveness of Bacteroides as some of their genera have
been found invading the gut microbiome [72,73]. The probiotic mixture
containing Bacillus mesentericus, C. butyricum, and S. faecalis, prevented
CDIs in elderly patients undergoing femoral fracture surgery (Nagamine,
Matsumoto et al., 2019). However, there is no therapeutic usefulness of
C. butyricum in adjuvant therapy. In recent times, the probiotic combi­
nation containing S. boulardii, or C. butyricum and Lactobacillus species
has been widely used for CDI prophylaxis (Nagamine, Matsumoto et al.,
2019).
Sometimes antibiotics have toxic effects on probiotics while sup­
plementation. An appealing solution to the antibiotics’ lethal activity on
probiotics may be the physical encapsulation of the latter in a protective
shell (Fig. 3). Currently, various polymeric particles have been devel­
oped to promote the colonization and presence of probiotics in the GIT,
but an efficient, safe, and quick coating with broad-spectrum antibiotic
resistance is yet to be developed [74]. The use of natural polyphenols to
create a nano armour coating for bacteria in the GIT is a novel approach
to protect bacteria from antibiotics [74]. This coating could act as a
barrier, allowing bacteria to survive the presence of antibiotics in the
GIT. Natural polyphenols, such as those derived from fruits, vegetables,
and nuts, have antimicrobial properties that may help to protect bacteria
from antibiotics. Additionally, the polyphenol coating could help to
reduce the number of antibiotics that are taken up by the bacteria, thus
Fig. 2. The gut microbiome plays a critical role in resisting pathogens and maintaining health, and it employs both direct and indirect mechanisms of resistance.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
4

preventing the development of antibiotic resistance. This coating could
also potentially improve the effectiveness of antibiotics by reducing the
doses of antibiotics required to achieve the desired therapeutic effect.
Pan et al. (2022) recently demonstrated that bacterial cells can be
coated in tannic acids and ferric ions ("probiotic nano armour") con­
taining a biocompatible coat, without compromising the cells’ activity.
This nano armour provides enhanced protection to the probiotic cells in
hostile environments, such as high temperatures and acidic conditions,
and allows them to remain viable and active in the gut. Moreover, the
probiotic cells with the nano armour were found to be more effective
than uncoated cells in providing protection against pathogens and
improving host health [74].
5.2. Engineered probiotics
To address the imbalance induced by C. difficile in the
Table 1
Probiotic treatment approaches against CDI.
Applied probiotic
Type of Study
CDI/Disease Symptoms
Outcome
References
Lactobacillus preparation (L. casei,
L. bulgaricus, and S. thermophilus)
A randomized double-
blind placebo-controlled
study
Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea
The rate of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea reduced
[130]
Saccharomyces boulardii
Controlled clinical trial
Chronic idiopathic diarrhoea
Enhanced the faecal biostructure of patients
[68]
Lactobacillus acidophilus CL1285,
Lactobacillus casei LBC80R, and
Lactobacillus rhamnosus CLR2 (Bio-
K+)
Case study
CDI outbreak due to Clostridium
difficile NAP1/027/BI strain
Marked reduction in CDI cases
[130]
Lactobacillus plantarum 299v
Case study
Organ transplant recipients
suffering from CDI
Routine use of LP299v while treatment of organ transplant
patients may prevent CDI
[66]
Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745
In vivo
C. difficile-associated cecal
inflammation
Inhibited the cytotoxic effects of C. difficile toxins, and
reduced the NF-κB phosphorylation, cecal tissue damage,
and TNFα protein expression
[71]
Saccharomyces boulardii plus
vancomycin
Clinical trial
Recurrent C. difficile disease
(CDD)
Saccharomyces boulardii plus vancomycin minimized
recurrent CDI cases
[131]
Saccharomyces boulardii plus standard
antibiotics (vancomycin
hydrochloride or metronidazole)
Double-blind,
randomised, placebo-
controlled intervention
study
Recurrent CDD
Significant effect in recurrent CDD cases
[69]
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
In vivo
C. difficile strain BI/NAP1/027
Reduced the C. difficile copies and colon inflammation,
increased the richness of Bacteroidetes and reduced the
level of Proteobacteria, increased the concentration of
metabolites that inhibits the growth of C. difficile
[73]
B. fragilis strain ZY-312
In vivo
C. difficile strain VPI 10463 spores
were used to develop the CDI mice
model (fatal diarrhoea)
Significant improvement in gut barrier impairment, and
microbiota disturbance, inhibited the C. difficile adherence
and attenuated the increase in CDI-induced symptoms
[72]
E. coli Nissle 1917
In vivo
Inflammatory bowel disease
Prevented gut inflammation
[132]
E. coli NGF-1
In vivo
Inflammatory bowel disease
Protected CDI
[133]
E. coli Nissle 1917
In vitro
Inflammatory bowel disease
Protected CDI
[134]
E. coli Nissle 1917
In vivo
Inflammatory bowel disease
Protected against dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis in
mice, immunomodulation and healing of the mucosa
[135]
E. coli Nissle 1917
In vivo
Inflammatory bowel disease
Attenuated the clinical symptoms in mice
[136]
B. fragilis strain ZY-312
In vivo
CDI (lethal diarrhoea, microbiota
disruption and serious gut barrier
disruption
Increased survival rates (low dosage group-100 % and
high dosage group-87.5 %)
[72]
Lactiplantibacillus plantarum E51
In vitro
Clostridioides difficile-induced
damages on Caco-2 intestinal
barrier functions
Inhibited C. difficile growth, ameliorated C. difficile-caused
reduction in transepithelial/trans-endothelial electrical
resistance, attenuated the C. difficile-induced IL8
secretion, and upregulated claudin-1 protein expression
[137]
Bacillus amyloliquifacienns
In vitro and in vivo
C. difficile infections
Showed anti-anti- CD effect under both in vitro and in vivo
[138]
Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588
A review
gastrointestinal infections
Effective against gastrointestinal infections caused by
C. difficile
[139]
Bacteriocin derived from Clostridium
butyricum
In vivo
CDI
Inhibited C. difficile infection
[140]
Lactobacillus plantarum 299v
Case study
CDI cases in organ transplant
recipients
Prevent CDI
[141]
Fig. 3. Single-cell coating (nano armour) made of natural polyphenols to protect bacteria against antibiotics in the GIT.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
5

gastrointestinal microbiome, engineered probiotics could be used to
retain the balance [75]. These probiotics are specifically designed to
target C. difficile and reduce its presence in the intestines [76]. They can
also promote the re-establishment of good bacteria like Bifidobacteria
and Lactobacillus species in the gut, which can further improve digestive
health and decrease the risk of infection. Besides restoring the gut
microbiome balance, engineered probiotics can also help to lessen the
inflammatory reaction and improve the overall health of the digestive
system [77].
Advancements in gene editing technology have opened new oppor­
tunities for probiotic application in CDI treatment. Researchers have
been able to use gene editing techniques such as CRISPR/Cas9 to modify
the genes of certain probiotic strains to improve their efficacy and safety
[78]. CRISPR/Cas9 technique can modify the genes of certain probiotic
strains to increase their resistance to antibiotics and other drugs,
improve their digestive health benefits, and enhance their ability to
produce beneficial substances [79]. Additionally, gene editing tech­
niques have been used to add new genes to probiotic strains, allowing
them to produce compounds with therapeutic benefits, such as
anti-inflammatory or anti-cancer agents. Finally, gene editing tech­
niques have been used to delete genes from probiotic strains, allowing
them to produce fewer harmful substances. Overall, gene editing tech­
nology provides a powerful tool to engineer probiotic strains that are
more effective and safer for human consumption. By now, several
modified probiotics have progressed to the clinical trial stage. The latest
advancement in the field of gene editing is CRISPR-Cas9 technology.
This technology enables precise editing of any gene sequence by
combining DNA-cutting enzymes and RNA-guided proteins. By altering
gene sequences, researchers can develop new probiotics with desirable
traits [80].
Another advancement in the field is the development of gene-editing
tools that target specific cells within the probiotic [81]. These tools are
used to modify the genetic makeup of the probiotic, which improves the
performance of the probiotic or to create new strains with improved
stability in the GIT, and increased tolerance to antibiotics. Additionally,
gene-editing tools have been used to engineer probiotic bacteria with
the ability to produce therapeutic proteins that can help reduce
inflammation, improve insulin sensitivity, and fight off infections [78].
Gene editing technology is advancing rapidly and is likely to revo­
lutionize the world of probiotics. This technology has the potential to
revolutionize the way people can improve their health, with potential
applications ranging from targeted treatments for diseases to improving
the performance of probiotic supplements. With gene editing, scientists
can modify the genetic code of microorganisms, allowing for the crea­
tion of new probiotic strains with tailored benefits to individual needs.
The possibilities for gene editing in the field of probiotics are virtually
limitless and could ultimately result in improved health outcomes for
people around the world. For example, gene editing could be used to
engineer probiotics that are better able to survive in the gut, thereby
boosting their effectiveness. It could also be used to create probiotics
that are designed to target specific diseases or conditions, allowing for a
more personalized approach to health [82]. Additionally, gene editing
techniques could allow the development of probiotics that are person­
alized to individual dietary requirements, having greater precision and
effectiveness. As technology continues to evolve, it is believable to have
substantial impact on probiotics research, revolutionizing how they are
used for health benefits. Engineered microbes with inflammatory bowel
disease applications have also been developed by scientists [83].
5.3. Prebiotic approaches
Earlier the prebiotics definition was limited to the non-digestible
food item which significantly benefited the host but later, it was
broadened
to
encompass
both
carbohydrates
(e.g.,
Fructo-
oligosaccharides (FOS), inulin, lactulose, galacto-oligosaccharides
(GOS)) and dietary prebiotics. Dietary prebiotics are described as “the
ingredients that positively affect the composition and/or activity of the
gut microbiome for the health profit of the host” [84]. However, the
most important aspect of prebiotics is their association with human
well-being, as their beneficial effects are further enhanced through
cross-feeding [85].
Prebiotics can help to renew the overall healthy balance of microbes
in the gut as well as reduce the risk of recurrence of C. difficile infections
[86]. They must meet criteria such as resistance to acidic pH,
non-hydrolysable by host enzymes, non-absorbable in the GIT, and
fermentable
by
intestinal
microorganisms
[87].
For
carbohydrate-derived prebiotics the degree of polymerization must be
≥3 [88].
There are several types of prebiotics such as glucose-derived oligo­
saccharides, galacto-oligosaccharides, pectic oligosaccharides, fructans,
starch, and other oligosaccharides carbohydrates (OSCs) which are very
useful in mitigating CDIs (Table 2). Naturally different dietary food
products like pulses and vegetables are rich sources of prebiotics but
recently, prebiotics have been obtained from seaweed and microalgae as
well [89]. However, due to its lower concentration in foods, nowadays
industries are producing it at large scales.
Over the past few years there has been an increased role of poly­
phenols as prebiotic agents. Polyphenols are compounds found in plants
that have significant health benefits because of their anti-inflammatory
Table 2
Prebiotic approaches against CDI.
SN
Compound
CDI activity
Reference
1
Human milk oligosaccharides
3′- and 6′-sialyl lactose
In vitro inhibition of bacterial
adhesion
[142]
2
S. boulardii cell wall
polysaccharides (mannan)
Proliferated Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron
[143]
3
Galactosyl-β1,4-l-rhamnose
(Gal-β1,4-Rha)
The growth of
Bifidobacterium was
selectively promoted
[143]
4
Potato starch
Supported innate immune
responses and reduced the
bacterial burden and adverse
effects during antibiotic and
C. difficile exposure
[144]
5
Inulin, mannose and raffinose
Decreased the formation of
Bacteroides sp. biofilm and
adhesion
[145]
6
Lactulose (synthetic
disaccharide composed of
fructose and galactose)
Decreased the frequency of
C. difficile-related diarrhoea
[146]
7
Witch hazel extract containing
hamamelitannin
Showed anti-toxin,
antimicrobial, and anti-
biofilm activities against
pathogenic microorganisms
[147]
8
Polyphenols in pomegranate
juice having ellagitannins
In vitro anti-CD activity
[148]
9
Tea polyphenols
Selective growth inhibitor of
CD
[149]
101
Pomegranate and blueberries
polyphenol extracts
Decreased the colonization
resistance against
Clostridioides difficile
[150]
11
Grape Seed extracts rich in
Proanthocyanins
Improved gut microflora
[151]
12
Polyphenolic extract of
Avocado peel high in
proanthocyanins
Showed a protective effect
on the alterations of high-
protein diet-induced colonic
homeostasis
[152]
13
d wine phenolic composition
(Flavan-3-ols, anthocyanins,
flavanols, hydroxycinnamic
and hydroxybenzoic acids,
stilbenes, and phenolic
alcohols)
Microbiota-modulating
effects
[153]
14
Tea phenolics, including
epicatechin, 3-O-methyl gallic
acid, catechin, gallic acid and
caffeic acid
Reduced the growth of
certain pathogenic bacteria
like Clostridium difficile,
Clostridium perfringens, and
Bacteroides spp.
[154]
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
6

and antioxidant activities [90]. Polyphenols improve the growth of good
bacteria like Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus in the gut and significantly
change immune system function [91]. Along with this, polyphenols can
decrease inflammation in the gut, which further reduces the symptoms
related to certain gastrointestinal disorders [92]. As we learn more
about the complex interaction with dietary polyphenols and the gut
microbiome, a functional synergy emerges. Plant polyphenols have
already been used as prebiotic agents to stop C. difficile spore develop­
ment and infection [93].
Polyphenols have been found as xenobiotics in the human body with
their moderate bioavailability [94]. Polyphenols change the gut
microenvironment through different strategies such as interfering with
quorum sensing, making bacteria susceptible to xenobiotics and
improving the permeability of the membrane [95]. Phenolics and fla­
vonoids modulate gut health by promoting the establishment of a
beneficial microbiome and inhibiting the spread of pathogenic bacteria
[96]. Due to structural complexity, polyphenols having higher molecu­
lar weight are not able to immerse in the small intestine. It has been
discovered that only 5–10 % of the overall polyphenols consumed are
absorbed. Therefore, it is imperative to study how polyphenols’
health-promoting effects develop when they are insufficiently consumed
and often detected in trace quantities in the systemic circulation. Poly­
phenols control the gut microbiota’s way of behaviors and composition
by secreting bioactive metabolites. The colonic microbiome breaks
down the complex polyphenols into low atomic weight polyphenols that
can be absorbed in the gut easily and provide health benefits. The
bioavailability and effectiveness of polyphenols and their metabolites in
the gut depend on the variation in polyphenol daily intake by in­
dividuals and differences in the gut flora. Polyphenols are commonly
kept in the gut for longer duration due to limited absorption, thereby
showing health-promoting effects, particularly via affecting the in­
testine’s ecology. The effect of polyphenols on gut ecology and their
mechanism of action against intestinal and extraintestinal illnesses have
been explored recently (Table 2). In recent studies, Wu et al. exhibited
that purified polyphenols extracted from Arctium lappa L. showed an
increased number of useful bacteria belongs to the family Mur­
ibaculaceae, Lactobacillaceae, and Ruminococcaceae and reduced abun­
dance of Escherichia, and Shigella, Proteobacteria, Enterobacteria. This
suggests that A. lappa L polyphenols have a positive influence on the gut
microbiota. A. lappa L.-derived polyphenols could improve inflamma­
tory responses in the gut. This finding indicates that A. lappa L poly­
phenols could be utilized as a potential probiotic to improve gut
microbiota homeostasis [97].
5.4. Synbiotic approaches
Synbiotics could be the best remedy for preventing the colonization
and infection caused by C. difficile. The promising effects shown by
synbiotics are either because of prebiotics or probiotics individually or
by combined effect shown by both. Synbiotics protect the CDI by mul­
tiple mechanisms such as nutritional support provided by prebiotics to
probiotics, secretion of antimicrobial byproducts by probiotics, compe­
tition exclusion, stimulating host immunity, inhibition of potential
pathogens, and occupation of the receptors of gastric epithelium by
either prebiotics or probiotics. However, the efficacy of synbiotics relies
on several predispositions of the host such as the disturbed gut micro­
biome and inability in nutrient metabolism. Therefore, it is imperative
to surge the efficacy of synbiotics by providing more functional pre­
biotics and other natural antimicrobial substances. Synbiotics increase
the number of good bacterial strains like Bifidobacterium spp. and
Lactobacillus spp. and the production of bioactive substances [98].
Synbiotics improve the gastric environment of the host by establishment
and survival of probiotics in the hostile environment of GIT and by
improving the composition of GIT. Supplementation of insulin and
bifidobacterium spp. in physically fit volunteers increased the counts of
bifidobacteria in faecal samples [99]. However, when Bifidobacterium
was supplemented alone there was no improvement in their population.
Similarly, the synbiotic mixture containing Bifidobacterium and gal­
actooligosaccharide improved colon health and concentrations of Bifi­
dobacterium [100]. A combination of probiotic and prebiotic treatments
has been found effective in reducing C. difficile growth in vivo [101].
Probiotics and prebiotics perform better together to support growth
and engraftment in the gut of the host. Several in vitro, in vivo and
clinical trials have been done to emphasize the impact of synbiotics on
gut health (Table 3). Ratsep et al. found that combining xylitol with
L. plantarum Induce inhibited the growth of C. difficile toxin-producing
cells and prevented the pathogen from colonizing the gut. The appli­
cation of synbiotics to prevent CDI and their recurrences are examples of
putative therapeutical approaches. In a random clinical trial, synbiotics
treatment changed the population of bacteria in the faeces, prevented
the release of organic acids after surgery and inhibited the abundance of
C. difficile [102]. Kondepudi et al. found that synbiotic formulations
containing probiotics like Bifidobacterium breve, B. lactis, L. plantarum,
L.
paracasei,
and
prebiotics
e.g.,
galactooligosaccharides,
isomalto-oligosaccharides, and starch or containing only multi-strain
probiotic formulation prevented against C. difficile infected mice
[103]. So, these formulations could be further subjected to clinical trials.
Although synbiotics could be the effective solution for the treatment of
CDI still there is a need to investigate the interaction between probiotics
and prebiotics, their effect on the host, the optimal dose and ideal time
duration of the synbiotics, and the outcomes of the long-term use. There
are some reports on the adverse effect of synbiotic use as well.
A synbiotic capsule containing Saccharomyces boulardii, Bacillus
coagulans, and fructooligosaccharide was given to 120 patients going
through antibiotic therapy for the treatment of AAD. The above treat­
ment cured the AAD in 95 % of residents and 97 % became free from
recurrent CDI [104]. There was no adverse effect of the synbiotics,
however, slight side effects like gastrointestinal upset and nausea have
been recorded in lower than 6 % of the cases. In a separate study, syn­
biotics containing quercetin, galactooligosaccharide, and Lactobacillus
acidophilus reduced oxidative status in intestinal epithelial cells [105].
These findings indicate that synbiotics probably work by reducing
oxidative stress and inflammation.
5.5. Microbiome replacement therapies (MRT)
It is well understood that antibiotics disrupt the gut microenviron­
ment which facilitates the proliferation of C. difficile, which in turn
produces toxins that increase the risk of CDI and their recurrence. Due to
the alteration of the microbiome, the pathogenesis of C. difficile
persuaded the development of MRT. Microbiome replacement therapies
are an emerging area of research. MRT involves using healthy bacteria to
replace the unhealthy bacteria that cause CDI. This is done by intro­
ducing healthy bacteria into the GIT of the patient. Healthy bacteria can
be obtained from different sources, such as transplants, probiotics, and
dietary supplements. The goal of MRT is to regain the proper balance of
good bacteria in the gut, which reduces CDI symptoms. Several strate­
gies such as nasogastric, nasoduodenal tube, colonoscopy, enema-based
microbial replacement, and capsule-based therapies are used for MRT.
In a systemic review, capsule-based therapies proved to be beneficial in
92 % of the patients treated with MRT in 7 randomized controlled trials
and 30 case studies [106]. A study done in the Netherlands showed
clinically significant results in 81 % of patients treated with MRT
(duodenal faecal infusion) as compared to antibiotic treatment (31 %
recovery). However, there is no significant role of MRT in the treatment
of refractory severe CDI. Although, several clinical trials have been
performed to assess the role of MRT in the treatment of primary, mod­
erate, and severe CDI or its use before antibiotic application. In a clinical
trial using enema-based microbial replacement (RBX2660), data from
the phase two trial showed that RBX2660 was better than the placebo
without any adverse events [107–109]. Though the use of antibiotics
reduces CDI colonization, antibiotic treatment changes the microbiome,
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
7

leading to recurrent infections [2]. During CDI, C. difficile has metabolic
flexibility, allowing it to exploit a variety of food sources. To combat
this, microbiome therapeutics are being developed to target the
C. difficile germination ability and growth rate of vegetative cells, restore
bile homeostasis, and lower the bioavailability of preferred nutrients.
Several biotech companies have already initiated clinical studies of their
microbiome treatments for CDI. The antibiotics are used to promote the
growth of C. difficile and thereby increase the risk of infection and dis­
ease recurrence. Therefore, to combat this, MRT could be a suitable
alternative.
5.6. Faecal microbiota transplant (FMT)
Faecal microbiota transplant (FMT) is a new emergent therapy that
Table 3
Synbiotic approaches for the treatment of CDI.
Synbiotic approach
Type of Study
Duration
Outcome
References
Inulin, 15 g Lactobacillus rhamnosus (LGG®)
Lactobacillus paracasei (L. casei 431®)
Lactobacillus acidophilus (LA-5®)
Bifidobacterium lactis (BB-12®)
Clinical Trials
1 Year
The recurrence of C. difficile-associated
diarrhoea (CDAD) reduced after 8 weeks
ClinicalTrials.gov
Identifier:
NCT04012788
Xylitol plus L. plantarum Inducia,
In-vivo
48 h
Reduced germination of C. difficile spores,
their colonization and their outgrowth
into toxin-producing cells
[155]
Inulin plus Bifidobacterium lactis B94 plus
Randomized, double-
blind, placebo-
controlled trial
One dose daily for 5 days
The duration of rotavirus-induced
diarrhoea was significantly decreased in
the synbiotic group compared to the
placebo group
[156]
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium strains plus FOS
Randomized, double-
blind, placebo-
controlled trial
2 daily doses of each for 30 days
Patients receiving antibiotics had higher
chances of evacuation, along with stool
consistency compared to placebo group
[157]
Bacillus coagulans and FOS
Randomized, double-
blind, placebo-
controlled trial
Thrice a day for 12 weeks.
The frequency of abdominal pain was
reduced with synbiotic treatment as
compared to the placebo
[158]
Inulin/oligofructose and Bifidobacterium
longum
Double-blind,
randomized, placebo-
controlled trial
Twice a day for 6 months.
Clinical outcomes significantly improved,
reduction in Crohn’s disease indices and
histological scores and TNF-α expression
[159]
Psyllium and Bifidobacterium longum
Randomized
controlled trial
4 weeks
Showed significant improvement in
synbiotic group patients (ulcerative
colitis)
[160]
Yakult, GOS and Bifidobacterium breve strain
Randomized
controlled trial
Yakult containing B. breve strain
(109 CFU/g) 3 times a day, and
5.5 g of GOS per day for 1 year
Noticeable improvement of endoscopic
parameters in patients with ulcerative
colitis
[161]
Fig. 4. Faecal matter transfer (FMT).
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
8

encompasses the transfer of faecal matter from a physically fit person’s
stool to a recipient that helps to repair the gut microbiome and treat
conditions like inflammatory bowel and antibiotic-associated diarrhoea
(Fig. 4). FMT is the utmost effective form of MRT for recurrent CDI cases,
with a recovery rate of over 90 %. FMT has been used for over 1700
years in traditional systems of medicine to treat a variety of illnesses
[110]. Recent research has revealed that healthy commensal bacteria in
the gut can collaborate to produce beneficial metabolites with
anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and even antifungal properties. These
metabolites might be accountable for the health-promoting effects of
FMT. In addition, FMT also modulates the immune response, reduces
inflammation,
and
restores
a
balanced
gut
microbiota.
Kamierczak-Siedlecka et al. studied the molecular mechanisms of FMT
and found that several bacterial species are important for the successful
outcome of FMT, including Bacteroides fragilis, Roseburia intestinalis, and
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [111].
FMT is a rapidly developing therapeutic approach that has become a
focus of biomedical and clinical studies. It is used as a last resort when
other therapies for C. difficile have failed. FMT is specifically composed
of well-known probiotic microbes that have been selected for their
ability to provide health benefits through one or more mechanisms. In
clinical studies, fecal matter transfer is generally safe and effective in
treating CDI with a success rate of over 90 % and few adverse effects
reported [112]. As research continues, the potential benefits of faecal
matter transfer may become clearer. However, further clinical trials are
essential to establish the efficacy of FMT in CDI [111].
Before samples can be accepted, donors must be meticulously tested
and vetted. To preserve the bacteria, the stool samples are diluted in
saline and filtered, and then glycerol is added. This sample is then stored
at −80 ◦C. The sample is administered in liquid form to the transplant
recipient. It can be transported either through the anus into the large
intestine using a colonoscopy, or via the nose and into the small intestine
using a nasoduodenal tube (NGT). Additionally, the donor’s stool sam­
ple is tested for any dangerous bacteria, viruses, and parasites. FMT
helps to restore a healthy bacterial balance in the colon. FMT is usually
performed with a colonoscopy, however, it can also be performed with a
less common approach, such as an NGT. During a colonoscopy, the co­
lonoscope is inserted into the colon and moved through the total length
of the colon. As the colonoscope is removed, the stool is delivered into
the colon. The stool contains healthy bacteria and other microbial or­
ganisms that help to restore a healthy bacterial balance in the colon.
Additionally, FMT can help to reduce symptoms related to the bowels,
Crohn’s, ulcerative colitis, and CDI.
Faecal transplantation via colonoscopy was found very suitable in
the treatment of recurrent CDI, which can recur in up to 50 % of patients
receiving antibiotics [113]. The potential role of FMT to treat CDI has
created a new area of research into microbiome-based restorative
therapies.
A pooled analysis of recurrent CDI cases by FMT via colonoscopy or
nasogastric tube (NGT) has been conducted by Postigo and Kim, to
determine the efficacy of the procedure. The results indicated that FMT
by colonoscopy or NGT could be an effective solution for the recurrent
CDI, regardless of procedure alterations. However, further studies are
required to explore the optimal delivery route for FMT [114,115].
The latest report of the treatment of a 78-year-old man suffering from
Pseudomembranous Colitis due to C. difficile persistence in the stool
sample from New Delhi, India. FMT by a healthy person’s stool helped to
cure these severe cases (Link 20.01.22).
There are some unsuccessful cases of FMT as well. For example, In
Italy while treating CDI with FMT (colonoscopy) only 69 % of patients
recovered by a single faecal dose, whereas the remaining 31 % required
repeat infusions [116]. The recovery rate of patients suffering from CDI
varied from 14 % to 59 % in the United States due to application of
non-specific antibiotics, severe and fulminant CDI, and pseudomem­
branous colitis. Moreover, FMT was associated with numerous side ef­
fects such as abdominal cramping, bloating, diarrhoea, and nausea
[117]. Besides two patients receiving FMT from the same donor suffered
from bacteriemia caused by E. coli, and one patient died [118]. Thus, the
selection of suitable donors and recipients is very crucial for performing
FMT.
5.7. Treatment of C. difficile by targeting toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB)
There are various antibiotics such as metronidazole or vancomycin
available for CDI treatment. These antibiotics mainly inhibit the toxins
(TcdA and TcdB) secreted by C. difficile, thus preventing further colon
damage. Additionally, probiotics may be utilized to reinstate the balance
of microbes in the gut. Treatment of C. difficile typically involves the use
of antibiotics to decrease the bacterial counts. However, in some cases,
antibiotics may not be enough to eradicate the infection. In these cases,
targeting the toxins produced by C. difficile may reduce the severity of
the infection. TcdA and TcdB are two of the most potent toxins produced
by C. difficile. To target these toxins, several medications have been
developed. These medications can include antibody-based therapies or
small molecule inhibitors that prevent toxin production or neutralize its
activity. In some cases, a combination of antibiotics and other treat­
ments may be necessary to successfully treat C. difficile.
Scientists have recently proposed that serine proteases from two
probiotic strains, Saccharomyces boulardii and Bacillus clausii, could be
used to prevent CDI. A serine protease from S. boulardii has been shown
to disrupt the quorum sensing mechanism of C. difficile, an important
regulatory mechanism. Moreover, this protease was also shown to
effectively suppress the toxin TcdA. Similarly, a protease from B. clausii
was found to be effective against TcdB. Both proteases have demon­
strated efficacy in vivo and in vitro, suggesting that they may be prom­
ising targets for further research regarding the prevention of CDI [119].
The toxins TcdA and TcdB required for C. difficile-caused diarrhoea are
produced by pathogenic strains. An alternate treatment fare CDI that has
revealed encouraging outcomes in preclinical and clinical investigations
is the administration of anti-toxin antibodies [120].
In a recent study, Hunag and McCreary reported that Clostridium
butyricum is useful in treating a variety of gastrointestinal conditions.
C. difficile was reported to be significantly inhibited by supernatants of
the C. butyricum MIYAIRI 588 strain (CBM588). A proteinaceous
component may be important in preventing C. difficile growth in vitro,
according to features of the supernatant from CBM 588 that are heat-
and pH-labile [121]. It has been established that recombinant CBM 588
bacteriocin (CBM-B) has an inhibitory effect against C. difficile, however,
spore germination and outgrowth were unaffected. By lowering the
expression of a toxin regulator when used at sub-lethal concentrations,
CBM-B could partially suppress the expression of toxins (tcdA and tcdB).
A mice infected with CDI, intra-rectal injection of CBM-B in combination
with vancomycin lead to in less body weight loss and a lower C. difficile
bacterial count in faeces than did CBM-B or vancomycin administration
alone. As a result, CBM-B from CBM 588 has the potential to be an in­
hibitor of C. difficile and a possible therapeutic therapy for CDI.
The effectiveness of human monoclonal antibodies (HuMab) and
polyclonal antibodies against C. difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB were
examined in a genotobiotic piglet model of CDI by Steele et al. [122,123]
The results showed that TcdB was a major virulence factor contributing
to both systemic and gastrointestinal (GI) tract diseases. Administration
of anti-TcdB antibodies alone or in combination with anti-TcdA
completely prevented systemic CDI in piglets and significantly
reduced GI lesions. In contrast, pigs who received only anti-TcdA
experienced severe GI and systemic illnesses with a 67–83 % death
rate, performing worse than the control animals which had been given a
placebo [123].
5.8. Postbiotic approach against CDI
The concept of postbiotics, which emerged in 2021, is currently
being widely studied [124]. Postbiotics are a form of metabolic
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
9

byproducts or non-viable bacterial products produced by probiotic mi­
croorganisms, which exert a biological effect on the host. Postbiotics are
composed of functional bioactive compounds created in an anaerobic
matrix, resulting from the fermentation of prebiotics and other organic
nutrients which generate energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate.
These byproducts, often of low molecular weight, include short-chain
fatty acids, microbial cell fragments, extracellular polysaccharides, cell
lysates, teichoic acid, vitamins, and more [125]. While prebiotics and
probiotics are currently the most popular products on the market,
postbiotics are gaining an increasing amount of attention due to their
numerous health benefits (Fig. 5). Probiotics are increasingly recognized
as a valuable tool for restoring balance to the intestinal microbiota
disrupted by factors such as antibiotic therapy. This disruption can
create an environment conducive to the overgrowth of C. difficile,
leading to a rise in C. difficile-associated infections. Although many
probiotics have demonstrated in vitro efficacy in inhibiting the growth or
toxicity of C. difficile, their use in treating or preventing CDI remains
limited due to a lack of robust clinical evidence. Only a few strains,
notably Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Saccharomyces boulardii, have
been extensively studied. The growing understanding of how probiotics
combat C. difficile through various mechanisms reviewed here suggests
that these live biotherapeutic agents hold promise for CDI management.
However, there is a need for more rigorous and standardized clinical
studies to evaluate probiotic products in conjunction with antibiotics, to
identify the most effective candidates for preventing or treating
C. difficile infections [55]. Given these insights, it is likely that the de­
mand for postbiotic supplements will rise in the future. Postbiotics,
known for their antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodu­
latory properties, are emerging as a promising option for treating or
preventing CDI. Research has demonstrated that postbiotics can inhibit
the growth of Clostridium difficile in both in vitro studies and animal
models, as well as reduce toxin production. Furthermore, postbiotic
therapy appears beneficial for premature infants, who frequently lack
beneficial bacteria. This therapy has been shown to mitigate inflam­
mation, improve digestion, and enhance overall health in these
vulnerable patients [121,126].
Postbiotics can be administered via food, supplements, or enemas.
These beneficial compounds are believed to offer a range of protective
effects, such as producing substances that reduce inflammation, bolster
the body’s natural defenses, and support healthy intestinal tissue. Evi­
dence suggests that postbiotic therapy is both safe and effective in
managing various intestinal disorders in premature infants [127].
In a recent study, Luenglusontigit et al. first used a high-throughput
screening approach to isolate and identify E. faecalis strains that pro­
duced bacteriocin-like compounds [128]. Screening of bacteriocin pro­
duction of E. faecalis PK1201 was achieved through proteolytic enzyme
treatment, followed by whole genome sequencing to characterize
bacteriocin-encoding genes. A postbiotic of E. faecalis PK1201 was then
prepared using neutralized cell-free supernatant or bacterial cell lysate,
which was screened for antimicrobial activity using agar well diffusion.
The lyophilized cell-free supernatant (LCFS) was subsequently tested for
its minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) against C. difficile 630.
Morphological changes of C. difficile were observed under scanning
electron microscopes. The LCFS at both sub-MIC and MIC concentrations
were used to evaluate anti-spore germination activity. Finally, the safety
of the postbiotic was evaluated using the Galleria mellonella model. The
efficacy and safety of LCFS has illuminated the role of postbiotics in
pharmaceutical products for the control of CDI [128].
Postbiotics have demonstrated the ability to support gut microbiota
health and reduce inflammation, which may help lower the risk of CDI.
They may also be effective in treating recurrent CDI by restoring gut
microbiota balance. In addition, postbiotics show great promise as an
adjunctive treatment for CDI due to their capacity to inhibit bacterial
growth, disrupt biofilms, and reduce toxin production, offering a po­
tential solution to antibiotic-resistant pathogens [129]. However,
further research is needed to confirm the efficacy and safety of these
compounds in treating CDI.
6. Conclusions and prospects for the future
In conclusion, probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics show significant
promise in addressing antibiotic-resistant gut dysbiosis and restoring
microbial balance, particularly in cases of Clostridioides difficile-induced
diarrhoea. Probiotics have demonstrated their ability to reduce inflam­
mation and lower the risk of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea, while
prebiotics promote the growth of beneficial gut bacteria. Synbiotics,
combining the benefits of both, offer a synergistic approach to
improving gut health. Although treatments like FMT and MRT exist,
they remain costly and less accessible. Probiotics face challenges with
premature degradation in the upper GI tract, and their use may be
limited in certain patient populations. Prebiotics, on the other hand, are
widely available and easily integrated into the diet, though further
clinical trials are required to fully validate their benefits. Overall, these
approaches provide a promising alternative for restoring gut health and
Fig. 5. Postbiotic approach for the treatment of CDI.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
10

managing CDI, but more research is needed to expand their application
and ensure their efficacy across diverse patient populations.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chandrashekhar Singh: Writing – original draft. Anjali Singh:
Visualization, Formal analysis. Deepjyoti Singh: Formal analysis, Data
curation.
Richa
Upadhyay:
Writing
–
review
&
editing,
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
There is no funding for this work.
References
[1] Di Bella S, et al. Clostridioides difficile infection: history, epidemiology, risk
factors, prevention, clinical manifestations, treatment, and future options. 2024,
e00135. 23.
[2] Gonzales-Luna AJ, Carlson TJ, Garey KW. Gut microbiota changes associated
with Clostridioides difficile infection and its various treatment strategies. Gut
Microbes 2023;15(1):2223345.
[3] Bass`eres E, et al. Antibacterial activity of ibezapolstat against antimicrobial-
resistant clinical strains of Clostridioides difficile 2024;68(3):e01621–3.
[4] Olaitan AO, et al. Decoding a cryptic mechanism of metronidazole resistance
among globally disseminated fluoroquinolone-resistant Clostridioides difficile
2023;14(1):4130.
[5] Lee P, et al. Risk factors for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection in children
2023;13(11):1010–7.
[6] Alsoubani M, et al. Comparative effectiveness of fidaxomicin vs vancomycin in
populations with immunocompromising conditions for the treatment of
Clostridioides difficile infection: a single-center study. In: Open forum infectious
diseases. Oxford University Press US; 2024.
[7] Pike CM, Theriot CM. Mechanisms of colonization resistance against
Clostridioides difficile. J Infect Dis 2021;223(12 Suppl 2):S194–s200.
[8] Dahiya D, Nigam PS. Antibiotic-therapy-induced gut dysbiosis affecting gut
microbiota—brain axis and cognition: restoration by intake of probiotics and
synbiotics 2023;24(4):3074.
[9] V´azquez-Cuesta S, et al. Characterization of the gut microbiome of patients with
Clostridioides difficile infection, patients with non–C. difficile diarrhea, and C.
difficile–colonized patients 2023;13:1130701.
[10] Pandey KR, Naik SR, Vakil BV. Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics- a review.
J Food Sci Technol 2015;52(12):7577–87.
[11] Bisht D, Pal D, Shrestha R. Introduction to probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics: a
holistic approach. In: Probiotics. CRC Press; 2024. p. 1–28.
[12] Chu J, et al. Immunological mechanisms of inflammatory diseases caused by gut
microbiota dysbiosis: A review 2023;164:114985.
[13] Wang W, et al. Inflammatory response: a crucial way for gut microbes to regulate
cardiovascular diseases 2023;15(3):607.
[14] Ruigrok RA, Weersma RK, Vich Vila AJGm. The emerging role of the small
intestinal microbiota in human health and disease 2023;15(1):2201155.
[15] Jaswal K, Todd OA, Behnsen JJGM. Neglected gut microbiome: interactions of the
non-bacterial gut microbiota with enteric pathogens 2023;15(1):2226916.
[16] Rinninella E, et al. What is the healthy gut microbiota composition? A changing
ecosystem across age, environment, diet, and diseases 2019;7(1):14.
[17] Amiri P, et al. Role of butyrate, a gut microbiota derived metabolite.
Cardiovascular diseases: a comprehensive narrative review, vol. 12; 2022,
837509.
[18] Zhang Y-J, et al. Impacts of gut bacteria on human health and diseases 2015;16
(4):7493–519.
[19] Tanaka M, Nakayama JJAI. Development of the gut microbiota in infancy and its
impact on health in later life 2017;66(4):515–22.
[20] Round JL, Mazmanian SK. The gut microbiota shapes intestinal immune
responses during health and disease 2009;9(5):313–23.
[21] Montalto M, et al. Intestinal microbiota and its functions 2009;3(2):30–4.
[22] Derrien M, Alvarez A-S, de Vos WM. The gut microbiota in the first decade of life
2019;27(12):997–1010.
[23] Murros KEJC. Hydrogen sulfide produced by gut bacteria may induce Parkinson’s
disease 2022;11(6):978.
[24] Hasan N, Yang HJP. Factors affecting the composition of the gut microbiota, and
its modulation 2019;7:e7502.
[25] Tang WH, Kitai T, Hazen SL. Gut microbiota in cardiovascular health and disease.
Circ Res 2017;120(7):1183–96.
[26] Fusco F, et al. The microbiota-gut-brain axis and epilepsy from a multidisciplinary
perspective: clinical evidence and technological solutions for improvement of in
vitro preclinical models. Bioeng Transl Med 2022;7(2):e10296.
[27] Shin JH, High KP, Warren CA. Older is not wiser, immunologically speaking:
effect of aging on host response to Clostridium difficile infections. J Gerontol A
Biol Sci Med Sci 2016;71(7):916–22.
[28] Zhang P. Influence of foods and nutrition on the gut microbiome and implications
for intestinal health. Int J Mol Sci 2022;23(17).
[29] Bosco N, Noti MJG, Immunity. The aging gut microbiome and its impact on host
immunity 2021;22(5):289–303.
[30] Adhikary S, et al. Impacts of gut microbiota alteration on age-related chronic liver
diseases 2024;56(1):112–22.
[31] Ross FC, et al. The interplay between diet and the gut microbiome: implications
for health and disease. 2024. p. 1–16.
[32] Tomova A, et al. The effects of vegetarian and vegan diets on gut microbiota.
Front Nutr 2019;6:47.
[33] Sidhu SRK, et al. Effect of plant-based diets on gut microbiota: a systematic
review of interventional studies. Nutrients 2023;15(6).
[34] Lin YT, et al. Anti-acid drug treatment induces changes in the gut microbiome
composition of hemodialysis patients. Microorganisms 2021;9(2).
[35] Patangia DV, et al. Impact of antibiotics on the human microbiome and
consequences for host health. Microbiologyopen 2022;11(1):e1260.
[36] Balasubramanian R, et al. Fermented foods: harnessing their potential to
modulate the microbiota-gut-brain axis for mental health. 2024, 105562.
[37] Clapp M, et al. Gut microbiota’s effect on mental health: the gut-brain axis 2017;7
(4):987.
[38] Martin SE, et al. The role of diet on the gut microbiome, mood and happiness.
medRxiv 2023.
[39] Vujkovic-Cvijin I, Somsouk M. HIV and the gut microbiota: composition,
consequences, and avenues for amelioration. Curr HIV AIDS Rep 2019;16(3):
204–13.
[40] Van der Waaij D, et al. Colonization resistance of the digestive tract in
conventional and antibiotic-treated mice 1971;69(3):405–11.
[41] Khan I, et al. Mechanism of the gut microbiota colonization resistance and enteric
pathogen infection. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 2021;11:716299.
[42] Pickard JM, Nú˜nez G. Pathogen colonization resistance in the gut and its
manipulation for improved health 2019;189(7):1300–10.
[43] Van Zyl WF, Deane SM, Dicks LMJGm. Molecular insights into probiotic
mechanisms of action employed against intestinal pathogenic bacteria 2020;12
(1):1831339.
[44] Lesniak NA, et al. The gut bacterial community potentiates Clostridioides difficile
infection severity. mBio 2022;13(4):e0118322.
[45] Singh TP, et al. Antagonistic activity of Lactobacillus reuteri strains on the
adhesion characteristics of selected pathogens, vol. 8; 2017. p. 486.
[46] Garcia-Gutierrez E, et al. Gut microbiota as a source of novel antimicrobials. Gut
Microbes 2019;10(1):1–21.
[47] Pickard JM, et al. Gut microbiota: role in pathogen colonization, immune
responses, and inflammatory disease. Immunol Rev 2017;279(1):70–89.
[48] Wu HJ, Wu E. The role of gut microbiota in immune homeostasis and
autoimmunity. Gut Microbes 2012;3(1):4–14.
[49] Jukes CA, et al. Bile salt metabolism is not the only factor contributing to
Clostridioides (Clostridium) difficile disease severity in the murine model of
disease. Gut Microbes 2020;11(3):481–96.
[50] Mullish BH, Williams HR. Clostridium difficile infection and antibiotic-associated
diarrhoea. Clin Med 2018;18(3):237–41.
[51] Yang S, et al. Prevention and treatment of antibiotics-associated adverse effects
through the use of probiotics: a review. 2024.
[52] Hill C, et al. Expert consensus document: the International Scientific Association
for Probiotics and Prebiotics consensus statement on the scope and appropriate
use of the term probiotic. 2014.
[53] Wang X, Zhang P, Zhang X. Probiotics regulate gut microbiota: an effective
method to improve immunity. Molecules 2021;26(19).
[54] Pal R, et al. Probiotics: insights and new opportunities for Clostridioides difficile
intervention. Crit Rev Microbiol 2023;49(3):414–34.
[55] Vald´es-Varela L, Gueimonde M, Ruas-Madiedo P. Probiotics for prevention and
treatment of Clostridium difficile infection. in Updates on Clostridioides difficile
in Europe: Advances in Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Public Health 2024;
18:101–16. Springer.
[56] Dempsey E, Corr SC. Lactobacillus spp. for gastrointestinal health: current and
future perspectives. Front Immunol 2022;13:840245.
[57] Li´evin-Le Moal V, Servin AL. Anti-infective activities of lactobacillus strains in the
human intestinal microbiota: from probiotics to gastrointestinal anti-infectious
biotherapeutic agents. Clin Microbiol Rev 2014;27(2):167–99.
[58] McFarland L, et al. Primary prevention of Clostridium difficile infections with a
specific probiotic combining Lactobacillus acidophilus. L. ´acasei, and L.
´arhamnosus strains: assessing the evidence 2018;99(4):443–52.
[59] Johnston BC, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of pediatric antibiotic-associated
diarrhea, vol. 11; 2011.
[60] Goodman C, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea:
a systematic review and meta-analysis 2021;11(8):e043054.
[61] Lukasik J, et al. Multispecies probiotic for the prevention of antibiotic-associated
diarrhea in children: a randomized clinical trial. Jun 2022;176(9):948. https://
doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2022.1973.
[62] Trejo FM, DeAntoni GL, P´erez PF. Protective effect of bifidobacteria in an
experimental model of Clostridium difficile associated colitis 2013;80(3):263–9.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
11

[63] Gargari G, et al. Consumption of a Bifidobacterium bifidum strain for 4 weeks
modulates dominant intestinal bacterial taxa and fecal butyrate in healthy adults
2016;82(19):5850–9.
[64] Gavzy SJ, et al. Bifidobacterium mechanisms of immune modulation and
tolerance 2023;15(2):2291164.
[65] Leal J, et al. Effectiveness of Bio-K+ for the prevention of Clostridioides difficile
infection: stepped-wedge cluster-randomized controlled trial 2024;45(4):443–51.
[66] Kujawa-Szewieczek A, et al. The effect of Lactobacillus plantarum 299v on the
incidence of Clostridium difficile infection in high risk patients treated with
antibiotics 2015;7(12):10179–88.
[67] Na X, Kelly C. Probiotics in clostridium difficile infection. J Clin Gastroenterol
2011;45:S154–8. Suppl(Suppl).
[68] Swidsinski A, et al. Biostructure of fecal microbiota in healthy subjects and
patients with chronic idiopathic diarrhea 2008;135(2):568–79.
[69] McFarland LV, et al. A randomized placebo-controlled trial of Saccharomyces
boulardii in combination with standard antibiotics for Clostridium difficile
disease 1994;271(24):1913–8.
[70] Salazar-Parra MA, et al. Effectiveness of Saccharomyces Boulardii CNCM I-745
probiotic in acute inflammatory viral diarrhoea in adults: results from a single-
centre randomized trial 2023;23(1):229.
[71] Koon HW, et al. Probiotic Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 prevents
outbreak-associated Clostridium difficile-associated cecal inflammation in
hamsters 2016;311(4):G610–23.
[72] Deng H, et al. Bacteroides fragilis prevents Clostridium difficile infection in a
mouse model by restoring gut barrier and microbiome regulation 2018;9:2976.
[73] Li X, et al. A strain of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron attenuates colonization of
Clostridioides difficile and affects intestinal microbiota and bile acids profile in a
mouse model 2021;137:111290.
[74] Pan J, et al. A single-cell nanocoating of probiotics for enhanced amelioration of
antibiotic-associated diarrhea 2022;13(1):2117.
[75] Koh E, et al. Engineering probiotics to inhibit Clostridioides difficile infection by
dynamic regulation of intestinal metabolism 2022;13(1):3834.
[76] Goldenberg JZ, et al. Probiotics for the prevention of Clostridium difficile-
associated diarrhea in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;12
(12):Cd006095.
[77] Zhou Z, et al. Engineering probiotics as living diagnostics and therapeutics for
improving human health, vol. 19; 2020. p. 1–12.
[78] Vaid S, et al. A concise review on development of probiotics from Lactobacillus
using CRISPR-Cas Technology of Gene Editing, vol. 1; 2022, 100099.
[79] Neil K, et al. High-efficiency delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 by engineered probiotics
enables precise microbiome editing 2021;17(10):e10335.
[80] Kirsch I. Biological sciences. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B, Biological Sciences. Preface. 2011;366(1572):1781–2.
[81] Mu Y, et al. Development and applications of CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing
in Lactobacillus 2022;23(21):12852.
[82] Ma J, et al. Engineered probiotics 2022;21(1):72.
[83] Parvin T, Sadras SR. Advanced probiotics: bioengineering and their therapeutic
application 2024;51(1):361.
[84] Bevilacqua A, et al. An update on prebiotics and on their health effects 2024;13
(3):446.
[85] Ballini A, et al. About functional foods: the probiotics and prebiotics state of art
2023;12(4):635.
[86] Gurung B, Stricklin M, Wang S. Gut microbiota–gut metabolites and
Clostridioides difficile infection: approaching sustainable solutions for therapy
2024;14(1):74.
[87] Ji J, et al. Probiotics, prebiotics, and postbiotics in health and disease 2023;4(6):
e420.
[88] Bamigbade GB, et al. An updated review on prebiotics: insights on potentials of
food seeds waste as source of potential prebiotics 2022;27(18):5947.
[89] Davani-Davari D, et al. Prebiotics: definition, types, sources, mechanisms, and
clinical applications. Foods 2019;8(3).
[90] Singh C, et al. Green synthesis of silver nanoparticles using aqueous leaf extract of
Premna integrifolia (L.) rich in polyphenols and evaluation of their antioxidant,
antibacterial and cytotoxic activity 2019;33(1):359–71.
[91] Filosa S, Di Meo F, Crispi SJNrr. Polyphenols-gut microbiota interplay and brain
neuromodulation 2018;13(12):2055–9.
[92] Zhao Y, Jiang QJAiN. Roles of the polyphenol–gut microbiota interaction in
alleviating colitis and preventing colitis-associated colorectal cancer 2021;12(2):
546–65.
[93] Babayevska N, et al. ZnO size and shape effect on antibacterial activity and
cytotoxicity profile 2022;12(1):8148.
[94] Di Lorenzo C, et al. Polyphenols and human health: the role of bioavailability
2021;13(1):273.
[95] Makarewicz M, et al. The Interactions between Polyphenols and Microorganisms,
Especially Gut Microbiota 2021;10(2):188.
[96] Rodríguez-Daza MC, et al. Polyphenol-mediated gut microbiota modulation:
toward prebiotics and further, vol. 8; 2021, 689456.
[97] Wu H-J, Wu EJGm. The role of gut microbiota in immune homeostasis and
autoimmunity 2012;3(1):4–14.
[98] Yan A, et al. Transformation of the anticancer drug doxorubicin in the human gut
microbiome 2018;4(1):68–76.
[99] Markowiak P, ´Sli˙zewska K. Effects of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics on
human health. Nutrients 2017;9(9).
[100] Kim S, et al. Bifidobacterium longum and galactooligosaccharide improve skin
barrier dysfunction and atopic dermatitis-like skin. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res
2022;14(5):549–64.
[101] Pereira FC, et al. Rational design of a microbial consortium of mucosal sugar
utilizers reduces Clostridiodes difficile colonization 2020;11(1):5104.
[102] R¨atsep M, et al. A combination of the probiotic and prebiotic product can prevent
the germination of Clostridium difficile spores and infection. Anaerobe 2017;47:
94–103.
[103] Kondepudi KK, et al. A novel multi-strain probiotic and synbiotic supplement for
prevention of Clostridium difficile infection in a murine model 2014;58(10):
552–8.
[104] Saneian H, et al. Synbiotic containing Bacillus coagulans and fructo-
oligosaccharides for functional abdominal pain in children. Gastroenterol Hepatol
Bed Bench 2015;8(1):56–65.
[105] Li X, et al. Effect of synbiotic supplementation on immune parameters and gut
microbiota in healthy adults: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. Gut
Microbes 2023;15(2):2247025.
[106] Johanesen PA, et al. Disruption of the gut microbiome: Clostridium difficile
infection and the threat of antibiotic resistance. Genes 2015;6(4):1347–60.
[107] D’Archivio M, et al. Bioavailability of the polyphenols: status and controversies.
Int J Mol Sci 2010;11(4):1321–42.
[108] Chaar A, Feuerstadt P. Evolution of clinical guidelines for antimicrobial
management of Clostridioides difficile infection. Therap Adv Gastroenterol 2021;
14:17562848211011953.
[109] Khanna S, et al. Efficacy and safety of RBX2660 in PUNCH CD3, a phase III,
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with a bayesian primary
analysis for the prevention of recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection. Drugs
2022;82(15):1527–38.
[110] Lin Z, et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation in recurrent Clostridium difficile
infection: is it superior to other conventional methods? Cureus 2020;12(8):e9653.
[111] Gupta S, Allen-Vercoe E, Petrof EO. Fecal microbiota transplantation: in
perspective. Therap Adv Gastroenterol 2016;9(2):229–39.
[112] Wardill HR, et al. Adjunctive fecal microbiota transplantation in supportive
oncology: emerging indications and considerations in immunocompromised
patients. EBioMedicine 2019;44:730–40.
[113] Mattila E, et al. Fecal transplantation, through colonoscopy, is effective therapy
for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection 2012;142(3):490–6.
[114] Postigo R, Kim JJI. Colonoscopic versus nasogastric fecal transplantation for the
treatment of Clostridium difficile infection: a review and pooled analysis 2012;40:
643–8.
[115] Ramai D, et al. Fecal microbiota transplantation: donor relation, fresh or frozen,
delivery methods, cost-effectiveness. Ann Gastroenterol 2019;32(1):30–8.
[116] Normington C, Chilton CH, Buckley AM. Clostridioides difficile infections; new
treatments and future perspectives 2024;40(1):7–13.
[117] Chen J, et al. Antibiotics-associated pseudomembranous colitis: a
disproportionality analysis of the US food and drug administration adverse event
reporting system (FAERS) database. 2024. p. 1–7.
[118] DeFilipp Z, , et alDrug-resistant E. Coli bacteremia transmitted by fecal
microbiota transplant 2019;381(21):2043–50.
[119] Ripert G, et al. Secreted compounds of the probiotic Bacillus clausii strain O/C
inhibit the cytotoxic effects induced by Clostridium difficile and Bacillus cereus
toxins. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2016;60(6):3445–54.
[120] Qiu H, et al. Novel Clostridium difficile anti-toxin (TcdA and TcdB) humanized
monoclonal antibodies demonstrate in vitro neutralization across a broad
spectrum of clinical strains and in vivo potency in a hamster spore challenge
model. PLoS One 2016;11(6):e0157970.
[121] McCreary J, et al. Development of an orally administered nanoparticle vaccine to
combat Clostridioides difficile infections. In: Oklahoma state university center for
health sciences research week; 2023. 2023.
[122] Bratkoviˇc T, et al. New treatment approaches for Clostridioides difficile
infections: alternatives to antibiotics and fecal microbiota transplantation. Gut
Microbes 2024;16(1):2337312.
[123] Steele J, et al. Antibody against TcdB, but not TcdA, prevents development of
gastrointestinal and systemic Clostridium difficile disease. J Infect Dis 2013;207
(2):323–30.
[124] Vinderola G, Sanders ME, Salminen S. The concept of postbiotics. Foods 2022;11
(8).
[125] Thorakkattu P, et al. Postbiotics: current trends in food and pharmaceutical
industry. Foods 2022;11(19).
[126] Mantziari A, et al. Postbiotics against pathogens commonly involved in pediatric
infectious diseases. Microorganisms 2020;8(10).
[127] Hijov´a E. Postbiotics as metabolites and their biotherapeutic potential. Int J Mol
Sci 2024;25(10).
[128] Luenglusontigit P, et al. Effects of postbiotic from bacteriocin-like inhibitory
substance producing Enterococcus faecalis on toxigenic Clostridioides difficile
2023;41(4):2023918.
[129] Ozma MA, et al. Evaluating the antibacterial, antibiofilm, and anti-toxigenic
effects of postbiotics from lactic acid bacteria on Clostridium difficile 2024;16(4):
497–508.
[130] Hickson MJBMJ. Use of probiotic Lactobacillus preparation to prevent diarrhoea
associated with antibiotics: randomised double blind placebo controlled trial.
335, pg 80, 2007) 2007;335(7623):754.
[131] Surawicz CM, et al. The search for a better treatment for recurrent Clostridium
difficile disease: use of high-dose vancomycin combined with Saccharomyces
boulardii 2000;31(4):1012–7.
[132] Daeffler KNM, et al. Engineering bacterial thiosulfate and tetrathionate sensors
for detecting gut inflammation 2017;13(4):923.
[133] Riglar DT, et al. Engineered bacteria can function in the mammalian gut long-
term as live diagnostics of inflammation 2017;35(7):653–8.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
12

[134] McKay R, et al. A platform of genetically engineered bacteria as vehicles for
localized delivery of therapeutics: toward applications for Crohn’s disease 2018;3
(3):209–21.
[135] Praveschotinunt P, , et alEngineered E. Coli Nissle 1917 for the delivery of matrix-
tethered therapeutic domains to the gut 2019;10(1):5580.
[136] Wang L, et al. An engineered probiotic secreting Sj16 ameliorates colitis via
Ruminococcaceae/butyrate/retinoic acid axis 2021;6(3):e10219.
[137] Jeng H-S, Yan T-R. Lactiplantibacillus plantarum E51 protects against
Clostridioides difficile-induced damages on Caco-2 intestinal barrier functions
2022;204(6):290.
[138] Islam MI, et al. In vitro and in vivo anti-Clostridioides difficile effect of a probiotic
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strain 2022;32(1):46.
[139] Ariyoshi T, et al. Effect of Clostridium butyricum on gastrointestinal infections
2022;10(2):483.
[140] McCreary J, Huang I-H. Characterization of a bacteriocin that targets
Clostridioidies difficile. In: Oklahoma state university center for health sciences
research week 2022: poster presentation; 2022.
[141] Dudzicz S. Profilaktyka zaka˙ze´n Clostridium difficile przy u˙zyciu szczepu
Lactobacillus plantarum 299v w oddziale nefrologii i transplantologii. Katedra i
klinika nefrologii, transplantologii i chor´ob wewnętrznych. 2022.
[142] Piotrowski M, et al. The prebiotic effect of human milk oligosaccharides 3′-and 6′-
sialyllactose on adhesion and biofilm formation by Clostridioides difficile–pilot
study 2022;24(3):104929.
[143] Kwak S, et al. Dissection and enhancement of prebiotic properties of yeast cell
wall oligosaccharides through metabolic engineering, vol. 282; 2022, 121379.
[144] Roychowdhury S, et al. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and a prebiotic protect
intestinal health in a mouse model of antibiotic and Clostridium difficile exposure
2018;42(7):1156–67.
[145] Piotrowski M, Wulta´nska D, Pituch HJFm. Effect of prebiotics on Bacteroides sp.
adhesion and biofilm formation and synbiotic effect on Clostridioides difficile
2022;17(5):363–75.
[146] Maltz C, Miskovitz PF, Hajifathalian KJJO. Lactulose may reduce Clostridium
difficile-related diarrhea among patients receiving antibiotics 2020;4(6):
1088–90.
[147] Failla M, et al. Evaluation of a witch hazel extract for the potential prebiotic and
protective effect on select lactiplantibacillus plantarum. Prev. Lactobacillus
plantarum) Strains 2022;9:874666.
[148] Finegold SM, et al. Pomegranate extract exhibits in vitro activity against
Clostridium difficile 2014;30(10):1210–2.
[149] Ahn Y-J, et al. Tea polyphenols: selective growth inhibitors of Clostridium spp
1991;55(5):1425–6.
[150] Mahnic A, et al. Microbiota in vitro modulated with polyphenols shows decreased
colonization resistance against Clostridioides difficile but can neutralize
cytotoxicity 2020;10(1):8358.
[151] Yamakoshi J, et al. Effect of proanthocyanidin-rich extract from grape seeds on
human fecal flora and fecal odor 2001;13(1):25–31.
[152] Cires MJ, et al. Protective effect of an avocado peel polyphenolic extract rich in
proanthocyanidins on the alterations of colonic homeostasis induced by a high-
protein diet 2019;67(42):11616–26.
[153] Requena T, et al. Perspectives of the potential implications of wine polyphenols
on human oral and gut microbiota 2010;21(7):332–44.
[154] Lee HC, et al. Effect of tea phenolics and their aromatic fecal bacterial metabolites
on intestinal microbiota 2006;157(9):876–84.
[155] R¨atsep M, et al. A combination of the probiotic and prebiotic product can prevent
the germination of Clostridium difficile spores and infection 2017;47:94–103.
[156] Islek A, et al. The role of Bifidobacterium lactis B94 plus inulin in the treatment of
acute infectious diarrhea in children 2014;25(6):628–33.
[157] Waitzberg DL, et al. Effect of synbiotic in constipated adult women–a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of clinical response 2013;32(1):27–33.
[158] Rogha M, et al. The efficacy of a synbiotic containing Bacillus Coagulans in
treatment of irritable bowel syndrome: a randomized placebo-controlled trial
2014;7(3):156.
[159] Steed H, et al. Clinical trial: the microbiological and immunological effects of
synbiotic consumption–a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study in
active Crohn’s disease 2010;32(7):872–83.
[160] Fujimori S, et al. A randomized controlled trial on the efficacy of synbiotic versus
probiotic or prebiotic treatment to improve the quality of life in patients with
ulcerative colitis 2009;25(5):520–5.
[161] Ishikawa H, Matsumoto S, Ohashi YJAMR. Digestion: beneficial effects of
probiotic Bifidobacterium and galacto-oligosaccharide in patients with ulcerative
colitis: a randomized Controlled Study 2011;16(2):201–2.
C. Singh et al.
Medicine in Microecology 24 (2025) 100121
13