======================================================================
论文信息提取结果
======================================================================

【源文件】1-s2.0-S1369527421001648-main.pdf

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【标题 / Title】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
What’s metal got to do with it? Transition metals in Clostridioides difﬁcile infection ScienceDirect

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【DOI】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
10.1016/j.mib.2021.11.004

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【摘要 / Abstract】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
[未识别到摘要]

----------------------------------------------------------------------
【全文 / Full Text】
----------------------------------------------------------------------
What’s metal got to do with it? Transition metals in
Clostridioides difﬁcile infection
Suzanna Y Gomez1, Jay Patel1 and Christopher A Lopez
The enteric pathogen Clostridioides difﬁcile overcomes barriers
to colonization imposed by the microbiota and host immune
response to induce disease. To navigate the dynamic gut
environment, C. difﬁcile must respond to dietary and hostmediated ﬂuctuations in transition metal availability. Transition
metals are required trace nutrients that foster inter-microbial
competition when limited, inhibit bacterial growth through host
sequestration, or induce toxicity in excess. This review
highlights recent evidence that transition metals inﬂuence
multiple stages of C. difﬁcile colonization and that C. difﬁcile
initiates a coordinated response to maintain metal-dependent
homeostasis. Further exploration of the mechanisms of C.
difﬁcile metal sensing and nutrient competition with the
microbiota will be necessary for the therapeutic manipulation of
the gut environment during C. difﬁcile infection.
Address
Department of Biological Sciences, California State University Sacramento, Sacramento, CA, United States
Corresponding author:
1 Authors contributed equally to this work.
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122
This review comes from a themed issue on Cell regulation
Edited by A` imee Shen and Rita Tamayo
For complete overview of the section, please refer to the article collection, “Cell Regulation 2022”
Available online 25th November 2021
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mib.2021.11.004
1369-5274/Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article
under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
).
Introduction
Nutrients are key drivers in shaping the ecology of
organisms within an environment [1]. In the mammalian
gastrointestinal tract, nutrient availability is one factor
controlling the diversity of the commensal bacteria, which
in turn inﬂuences host immune responses, metabolism,
and other critical processes [2,3]. Transition metals that
include iron (Fe), zinc (Zn), manganese (Mn), and nickel
(Ni) are trace elements necessary for all bacteria by
serving as structural components in proteins and as enzymatic cofactors [4]. Limited metal availability initiates
stress responses that reprogram metabolic pathways,
increase production of proteins involved in metal uptake,
and alter virulence factor expression [5]. Yet, maintaining
intracellular metal pools must be balanced with avoiding
toxic high metal concentrations. The coordinated control
of metal availability is referred to as metallostasis [5].
Clostridioides difﬁcile is a spore-forming bacterium that
typically colonizes the intestines following dysbiosis, or
disruption of the commensal microbiota [6]. Spores entering the intestines subsequent to dysbiosis germinate into
vegetative C. difﬁcile, which produce toxins that trigger a
robust inﬂammatory response that further destabilizes the
resident microbiota [7]. Throughout the cycle of C. difﬁcile
colonization, infection, and transmission, metal availability is controlled through the actions of the microbiota that
may compete for those metals and by the immune
response that limits metal concentrations in a process
termed nutritional immunity. Here, we provide a brief
overview of recent advancements in understanding the
factors that control metal availability during C. difﬁcile
infection (CDI) and how C. difﬁcile responds to those
shifting metal concentrations to successfully colonize the
intestines.
Transition metal availability and the
microbiota
Approximately 90% of the gut bacteria in adult humans
are from the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes, with
Actinobacteria, Verrucumicrobia, and Proteobacteria collectively making up less than 10% of the remaining
microbiota [8]. This diverse microbiota protects against
overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria through a process
called colonization resistance [9]. Disruption of colonization resistance is a primary risk factor that increases
susceptibility to CDI and can be caused by antibiotic
use or underlying inﬂammatory disorders [10,11]. Large
ﬂuctuations in nutrient metal availability, either through
supplementation or deﬁciency, can similarly alter the
microbiota composition to decrease colonization resistance (Figure 1) [12,13].
Nearly all bacteria require Fe, thus changes in dietary Fe
availability can impact the abundances of bacteria in the
intestines [13,14]. Limited Fe can force competition,
allowing bacteria such as members of the Enterobacteriaceae to outcompete other bacteria through multiple
mechanisms including the production of high Fe-afﬁnity
siderophores that capture ferric iron (Fe3+) [12,15,16].
Consistent with this notion, an increase in the proportion
of Escherichia coli was observed in mice fed low Fe diets
and was associated with increased transcription of siderophore import genes [17]. Alternatively, Fe supplementation in conjunction with inﬂammation also leads to
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122
www.sciencedirect.com

changes in the microbiota characterized by an increase in
Proteobacteria [18] and a decrease in beneﬁcial butyrateproducing Clostridia including Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Ruminococcus bromii [19]. While there is variation in
the speciﬁc populations affected by Fe deﬁciency and
supplementation, multiple studies support Enterobacteriaceae blooms as a biomarker of microbiota destabilization [20]. Indeed, in a mouse CDI model, Enterobacteriaceae blooms following low-dose antibiotic treatments
predicts susceptibility to C. difﬁcile colonization [21]. In
humans, adults symptomatically and asymptomatically
colonized with C. difﬁcile have higher abundances of
Enterobacteriaceae compared to non-colonized individuals [22]. A similar trend is observed in elderly patients
with CDI, where C. difﬁcile is associated with increased E.
coli and decreased F. prausnitzii abundances [23]. Despite
similar
patterns
of
dysbiosis
between
microbiota
experiencing changes in Fe availability and microbiota
during CDI, there is limited evidence that directly links
dietary Fe to CDI susceptibility. A possible explanation
could be that changes in Fe availability only affect CDI
susceptibility in conjunction with other CDI risk factors.
In accordance with this idea, supplementation of another
dietary metal, Zn, only allowed C. difﬁcile to colonize
when combined with antibiotics. In this study, excess
dietary Zn increased the proportion of Enterococcus and
Clostridia XI while decreasing Turicibacter populations
[24]. The excess Zn-induced dysbiosis then lowered
the dose of antibiotics necessary to reduce colonization
resistance against C. difﬁcile [24,25]. Overall, as necessary
nutrients, extreme changes in Fe and Zn concentrations
can drastically inﬂuence the microbiota and synergize
with other risk factors to alter susceptibility to CDI.
Inﬂammation and nutritional immunity: a
changing landscape
During CDI, toxin-mediated intestinal inﬂammation
induces host immune responses that change metal availability (Figure 2). C. difﬁcile produces two primary toxins,
TcdA and TcdB, involved in intestinal inﬂammation and
epithelial damage [26]. The host immune response to
these toxins is in part characterized by an inﬂux of
neutrophils that release cytosolic calprotectin (CP) [7].
CP is a heterodimeric protein of S100A8 and S100A9 that
sequesters divalent ﬁrst row transition metals at two sites
at the dimer interface [27] to limit bioavailable Zn, Fe, Ni,
Mn, and copper (Cu) [28,29–32]. Neutrophils and epithelial cells also release lipocalin-2, or neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), during inﬂammation
[33]. Lipocalin-2 interferes with bacterial Fe uptake by
binding to catecholate siderophores [33]. Fecal CP and
lipocalin-2 concentrations are clinically used as biomarkers of inﬂammation severity [34,35] and shape the gut
environment by altering metal availability.
While CP and lipocalin-2 limit metal acquisition, toxinmediated epithelial damage and edema cause intestinal
hemorrhaging and the release of Fe-containing heme
through hemoglobin degradation [36–38]. Excessive
heme accumulation is toxic to C. difﬁcile [36], requiring
the bacterium to adapt to high levels of luminal heme for
survival.
Changes in metal oxidation states also likely occur during
CDI. Antibiotic treatment and CDI in murine models
increase tissue oxygenation in colonic epithelial cells
[39,40]. Oxygen diffusing into the lumen can then oxidize
soluble ferrous Fe (Fe2+) to form less soluble Fe3+ (Figure 2). Changes in metal accessibility due to oxidation,
along with sequestration by host immune proteins and the
risk of heme toxicity during CDI, contribute to a dynamic
intestinal environment in which C. difﬁcile must adapt to
continue thriving.
Adaptation to nutrient metal availability
Iron regulation
Fe is limited in the inﬂamed intestines due to chelation
by host Fe-binding proteins [41] and environmental
conditions that oxidize Fe2+ to Fe3+, as discussed in
the previous section (Figure 2). In C. difﬁcile, the relative
abundance of Fe is detected primarily by the ferricTransition metals in Clostridioides difficile infection Gomez, Patel and Lopez
117
Figure 1
uninfected
CDI
Clostridia
Enterobacteriaceae
Clostridioides
difficile
inflammation
Current Opinion in Microbiology
Association of iron and zinc with susceptibility towards Clostridioides
difficile infection.
Under homeostatic conditions, commensal microbes in the gut
provide colonization resistance against pathogenic bacteria. Limited
iron availability can destabilize the microbiota, increasing the relative
abundance of Enterobacteriaceae. Iron excess and inflammation
similarly alter the microbiota through promoting a bloom of
Enterobacteriaceae while decreasing abundance of beneficial
Clostridia. Excess zinc synergizes with antibiotic use to lower the
antibiotic threshold for C. difficile colonization through changes in the
microbiota, increasing the risk of infection. CDI — Clostridioides
difficile infection.
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122

uptake regulator (Fur), which dimerizes under Fe-replete
conditions and binds DNA [42]. As in other bacteria [42],
Fur typically represses gene transcription when bound to
Fe [43]. Fur de-repression in an Fe-deplete environment
results in the transcription of multiple genes with roles in
metallostasis and metabolism [44]. Amongst the genes
involved in metallostasis are zupT (zinc transporter), a
putative fhu operon (predicted siderophore uptake), and
feo genes (ferrous iron importers) (Figure 3) [44]. ZupT is
highly expressed under Fe-limited and Zn-limited conditions [43,45–47] and imports Zn in response to CP [45].
The expression of a Zn-importer under Fe-starvation may
be due to CP-mediated chelation of both metals under
physiological conditions [28]. Thus, during infection the
presence of CP may indicate both Zn and Fe limitation,
prompting C. difﬁcile to respond to reduced availability of
these metals. Alternatively, C. difﬁcile may have evolved
cross-regulation of Fe and Zn starvation responses similar
to those described in Staphylococcus aureus where both Fur
and a Zn-uptake regulator (Zur) coordinate transcription
of the metallophore staphylopine [48]. Though no functional Zur is described in C. difﬁcile, other regulatory
mechanisms may mediate cross-regulation with multiple
stress responses. This type of non-Fur family regulation
was observed in Clostridium beijernckii, where Fe2+ bound
to AdhR de-repressed metabolic adhA1 and adhA2 expression [49].
Genes in the fhu operon are homologous to genes encoding siderophore uptake machinery [50]. However, no
siderophore biosynthesis pathways are described for C.
difﬁcile, leaving the intriguing possibility that C. difﬁcile
may engage in siderophore piracy and transport microbiota-produced siderophores similar to Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron [51]. Ferrous Fe transporters encoded by feoB
and feoA are widespread amongst Bacteria [52]. FeoB is an
integrated membrane protein with a G-protein domain
and provides the route of entry for Fe2+ [52]. The function of cytosolic FeoA is unknown, though recent reports
propose a model where FeoA interacts with FeoB to
modulate GTPase activity and Fe import [53]. While
most bacteria encode a single feoAB operon [52], C. difﬁcile
encodes multiple feoAB systems [40]. For instance, the
common laboratory strain 630 encodes 3 feoB and 5 feoA
118
Cell regulation
Figure 2
intestinal lumen
C. difficile
intestinal epithelium
siderophore
lipocalin-2
Mn/Cu/Ni
CP
Zn
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Current Opinion in Microbiology
Changes in metal availability during Clostridioides difficile-induced inflammation.
(a) O2 levels in the intestinal lumen increase following antibiotic treatment and during C. difficile infection. Increased luminal O2 can oxidize Fe2+
into less soluble Fe3+, changing its accessibility to C. difficile. (b) Intestinal hemorrhaging due to epithelial damage and edema, followed by
hemoglobin degradation, leads to the release of heme in the lumen. (c) Infiltrating host neutrophils release CP and lipocalin-2 to sequester
transition metals (Zn, Fe, Ni, Mn, and Cu) and microbiota-derived catecholate siderophores respectively. (d) C. difficile encodes genes predicted
to be involved in siderophore uptake, implicating the possibility that C. difficile engages in siderophore piracy. CP — calprotectin; Zn — zinc; Fe
— iron; Ni — nickel; Mn — manganese; Cu — copper.
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122
www.sciencedirect.com

genes, with only some of these regulated by Fur [43,44].
Fe2+ import via FeoAB can inﬂuence not only metallostasis, but can alter clinically relevant aspects of C. difﬁcile
physiology. Mutation of feoB1 induces an Fe starvation
response that shifts C. difﬁcile metabolism towards pathways that decrease sensitivity to the antibiotic metronidazole [54], which served as a frontline antibiotic in the
treatment of CDI [55]. The factors that regulate the
production of C. difﬁcile feoA and feoB and how multiple
copies of these genes enable C. difﬁcile to survive in the
intestines warrant further investigation.
Fe limitation also alters transcription of metabolic genes
(for a full view, see Ref. [44]). For example, proline
reduction via a proline reductase supports energy production and the maintenance of redox balance. Increased
availability of proline or hydroxyproline, a component of
collagen, opens a niche from which C. difﬁcile can compete
with
the
microbiota
[46,56].
Under
Fe-limited
conditions, C. difﬁcile increases transcription of proline
reductase genes, shifting energy production from glycolysis to amino acid fermentation via Stickland reactions
[44]. Decreased ﬂux through central carbon catabolic
pathways, largely owing to reliance of those pathways
on Fe-containing ferredoxins and Fe-sulfur clusters, is a
key metabolic signature for C. difﬁcile in a Fe-deplete
environment.
Heme stress
The inﬂux of heme during CDI could potentiate detrimental reactive oxygen species generation [41]. To limit
the toxic effects of heme overabundance, C. difﬁcile
encodes two systems that are speciﬁcally responsive to
heme. Heme binding to the transcriptional regulator
HatR will de-repress transcription of hatT, an efﬂux pump
that limits intracellular heme concentrations [36]. Under
high heme stress, the regulator HsmR activates transcription of HsmA to incorporate heme into the cytoplasmic
Transition metals in Clostridioides difficile infection Gomez, Patel and Lopez
119
Figure 3
siderophore
carbon
fermentation
Stickland
fermentation
cytosol
extracellular
Current Opinion in Microbiology
A simplified overview of C. difficile adaptation to changes in transition metal concentrations.
In a low Fe environment, Fur repression is relieved and genes encoding metal transporters zupT and feoB are transcribed. ZupT imports Zn to
overcome CP-mediated metal sequestration while FeoB imports Fe2+. An annotated fhu operon is also under Fur control and is predicted to
import Fe3+ bound to siderophore molecules. During CDI, high heme results in upregulation of hsmA and hatT, which encode for a heme efflux
pump and a membrane-bound protein that sequesters heme, respectively. Limited availability of Fe and Zn also induce metabolic shifts, including
a reduced reliance on carbon fermentation in favor of amino acid fermentation via Stickland reactions. Ni acquisition is predicted to be
accomplished through an import protein OppA. Fur — ferric uptake regulator; CP — calprotectin; Fe — iron; Zn — zinc; Mn — manganese; Ni —
nickel; Cu — copper; large dashed line — predicted pathway; small dashed line — indicates transcription and translation; gray arrows —
transcriptional regulation.
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122

membrane [57]. Heme-bound HsmA decreases sensitivity to oxidative stress and to the antibiotic vancomycin
[57], a current ﬁrst-line treatment for primary CDI [55].
Additionally, mutations in hsmA can confer resistance to
metronidazole [58]. Combined, the HatRT and HsmRA
systems protect C. difﬁcile from toxic concentrations of
heme released during inﬂammation.
Zinc regulation
In response to CP-mediated Zn sequestration, C. difﬁcile
upregulates transcription of many of the same genes that
increase under Fe limitation [44,46], similar to that
observed in Acinetobacter baumannii where CP elicited a
dual Zn/Fe response [28]. As part of the response to CP,
C. difﬁcile upregulates zupT, which enables C. difﬁcile to
overcome CP Zn sequestration in a mouse model of CDI
[45]. The selenoprotein proline reductase is also more
highly transcribed in C. difﬁcile grown with CP [46].
Furthermore, deletion of selenoprotein synthesis inhibits
function of the proline reductase with concomitant
increases in the expression of genes involved in mannitol
catabolism, possibly shifting C. difﬁcile metabolism away
from Stickland fermentation and towards mannitol fermentation [59]. Combined, these studies suggest an
interplay between Zn and selenoprotein synthesis that
inﬂuence metabolic pathways relevant to C. difﬁcile
colonization.
Other nutrient metals
Aside from Fe and Zn, there is limited data on the roles
other nutrient metals play in C. difﬁcile physiology and
virulence. C. difﬁcile encodes two Mn-dependent catalases
(cotD, cotG) and a Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase
(sodA) that are associated with the spore coat [60]. As
these genes are not upregulated in the presence of oxygen
[40,61], it is likely they perform a function associated with
spore maturation or protection rather than ROS detoxiﬁcation in vegetative C. difﬁcile. Mn is also required for
ﬁbronectin-binding in Fbp68, which may enable C. difﬁcile attachment to host cell surfaces during infection [62].
Recently, a putative Ni-uptake system was identiﬁed
through comparison of a peptide transporter in C. difﬁcile,
OppA, with the Ni-binding protein NikZ in Campylobacter
jejuni [63]. This led to the hypothesis that OppA functions
as a Ni-transporter for Ni-dependent enzymes like urease
[63]. However, the full contribution of Mn and Ni availability on CDI remain an open area of exploration.
Conclusion
From the initial changes to the microbiota that increase
colonization susceptibility to the subsequent immune
response, changes in nutrient metal accessibility inﬂuence C. difﬁcile colonization and survival. While there are
many unknown details in how C. difﬁcile controls its
responses to environmental ﬂuctuations in metal concentrations, there are two areas in particular that may be
fruitful topics for future exploration. First, how does C.
difﬁcile sense and respond to limitation of non-Fe metals
like Zn and Mn and what are the effects on C. difﬁcile
colonization? Second, how does metal availability impact
C. difﬁcile interactions with the microbiota? Illuminating
these avenues of the host-microbe-C. difﬁcile interplay
will ultimately broaden our understanding of the adaptation strategies inherent in this pathogen.
Funding
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from
funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-forproﬁt sectors.
Conﬂict of interest statement
Nothing declared.
References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review,
have been highlighted as:

of special interest
 of outstanding interest
1.
Pereira FC, Berry D: Microbial nutrient niches in the gut. Environ
Microbiol 2017, 19:1366-1378.
2.
Rooks MG, Garrett WS: Gut microbiota, metabolites and host
immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2016, 16:341-352.
3.
Tuganbaev T, Honda K: Non-zero-sum microbiome immune
system interactions. Eur J Immunol 2021, 9:2120-2136.
4.
Andreini C, Bertini I, Cavallaro G, Holliday GL, Thornton JM: Metal
ions in biological catalysis: from enzyme databases to general
principles. J Biol Inorg Chem 2008, 13:1205-1218.
5.
Jordan MR, Wang J, Capdevila DA, Giedroc DP: Multi-metal
nutrient restriction and crosstalk in metallostasis systems in
microbial pathogens. Curr Opin Microbiol 2020, 55:17-25.
6.
Theriot CM, Koenigsknecht MJ, Carlson PE Jr, Hatton GE,
Nelson AM, Li B, Huffnagle GB, Li JZ, Young VB: Antibioticinduced shifts in the mouse gut microbiome and metabolome
increase susceptibility to Clostridium difﬁcile infection. Nat
Commun 2014, 5:3114.
7.
Abt MC, McKenney PT, Pamer EG: Clostridium difﬁcile colitis:
pathogenesis and host defence. Nat Rev Microbiol 2016,
14:609-620.
8.
Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, Le Paslier D, Yamada T,
Mende DR, Fernandes GR, Tap J, Bruls T, Batto JM et al.:
Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 2011,
473:174-180.
9.
Ducarmon QR, Zwittink RD, Hornung BVH, van Schaik W,
Young VB, Kuijper EJ: Gut microbiota and colonization
resistance against bacterial enteric infection. Microbiol Mol
Biol Rev 2019, 83.
10.

Abernathy-Close L, Barron MR, George JM, Dieterle MG,
Vendrov KC, Bergin IL, Young VB: Intestinal inﬂammation and
altered gut microbiota associated with inﬂammatory bowel
disease render mice susceptible to Clostridioides difﬁcile
colonization and infection. mBio 2021, 12:e0273320
The authors developed a novel murine model of irritable bowel disease to
analyze the link between non-antibiotic changes in the microbiota and
susceptibility to C. difﬁcile infection. In this model chronic inﬂammation
caused by Helicobacter hepaticus modulated the microbiota to allow C.
difﬁcile to colonize.
11.

Bushman FD, Conrad M, Ren Y, Zhao C, Gu C, Petucci C, Kim MS,
Abbas A, Downes KJ, Devas N et al.: Multi-omic analysis of the
Interaction between Clostridioides difﬁcile infection and
pediatric inﬂammatory bowel disease. Cell Host Microbe 2020,
28:422-433 e7
120
Cell regulation
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122
www.sciencedirect.com

In this study, the authors investigated differential metabolic markers of
disease that distinguish between pediatric patients with irritable bowel
disease (IBD) and those with IBD that are simultaneously infected with C.
difﬁcile (CDI). The most highly associated metabolite in patients with IBD
and CDI was isocaproyltaurine, a product of C. difﬁcile taurine
metabolism.
12. Lopez CA, Skaar EP: The impact of dietary transition metals on
host-bacterial interactions. Cell Host Microbe 2018, 23:737-748.
13. Li CY, Li XY, Shen L, Ji HF: Regulatory effects of transition
metals supplementation/deﬁciency on the gut microbiota.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2021, 105:1007-1015.
14. Parmanand BA, Kellingray L, Le Gall G, Basit AW, FairweatherTait S, Narbad A: A decrease in iron availability to human gut
microbiome reduces the growth of potentially pathogenic gut
bacteria; an in vitro colonic fermentation study. J Nutr Biochem
2019, 67:20-27.
15. Deriu E, Liu JZ, Pezeshki M, Edwards RA, Ochoa RJ, Contreras H,
Libby SJ, Fang FC, Raffatellu M: Probiotic bacteria reduce
Salmonella Typhimurium intestinal colonization by competing
for iron. Cell Host Microbe 2013, 14:26-37.
16. Sousa Geros A, Simmons A, Drakesmith H, Aulicino A, Frost JN:
The battle for iron in enteric infections. Immunology 2020,
161:186-199.
17. Ellermann M, Gharaibeh RZ, Maharshak N, Perez-Chanona E,
Jobin C, Carroll IM, Arthur JC, Plevy SE, Fodor AA, Brouwer CR
et al.: Dietary iron variably modulates assembly of the
intestinal microbiota in colitis-resistant and colitissusceptible mice. Gut Microbes 2020, 11:32-50.
18. Botta A, Barra NG, Lam NH, Chow S, Pantopoulos K,
Schertzer JD, Sweeney G: Iron reshapes the gut microbiome
and host metabolism. J Lipid Atheroscler 2021, 10:160-183.
19. Lee T, Clavel T, Smirnov K, Schmidt A, Lagkouvardos I, Walker A,
Lucio M, Michalke B, Schmitt-Kopplin P, Fedorak R et al.: Oral
versus intravenous iron replacement therapy distinctly alters
the gut microbiota and metabolome in patients with IBD. Gut
2017, 66:863-871.
20. Litvak Y, Baumler AJ: Microbiota-nourishing immunity: a guide
to understanding our microbial self. Immunity 2019, 51:214224.
21.

Lesniak NA, Schubert AM, Sinani H, Schloss PD: Clearance of
Clostridioides difﬁcile colonization is associated with
antibiotic-speciﬁc bacterial changes. mSphere 2021, 6
This study describes how different microbial communities, shaped by
exposure to antibiotics, inﬂuence C. difﬁcile colonization and clearance.
While blooms of Enterobacteriaceae were associated with C. difﬁcile
colonization, clearance was associated with variable microbiota members depending on the antibiotic provided.
22. Han SH, Yi J, Kim JH, Moon AH: Investigation of intestinal
microbiota and fecal calprotectin in non-toxigenic and
toxigenic Clostridioides difﬁcile colonization and infection.
Microorganisms 2020, 8.
23. Vakili B, Fateh A, Asadzadeh Aghdaei H,
Sotoodehnejadnematalahi F, Siadat SD: Intestinal microbiota in
elderly inpatients with Clostridioides difﬁcile infection. Infect
Drug Resist 2020, 13:2723-2731.
24. Zackular JP, Moore JL, Jordan AT, Juttukonda LJ, Noto MJ,
Nicholson MR, Crews JD, Semler MW, Zhang Y, Ware LB et al.:
Dietary zinc alters the microbiota and decreases resistance to
Clostridium difﬁcile infection. Nat Med 2016, 22:1330-1334.
25. Zackular JP, Skaar EP: The role of zinc and nutritional immunity
in Clostridium difﬁcile infection. Gut Microbes 2018, 9:469-476.
26. Aktories K, Schwan C, Jank T: Clostridium difﬁcile toxin biology.
Annu Rev Microbiol 2017, 71:281-307.
27. Zygiel EM, Nolan EM: Transition metal sequestration by the
host-defense protein calprotectin. Annu Rev Biochem 2018,
87:621-643.
28.

Wang J, Lonergan ZR, Gonzalez-Gutierrez G, Nairn BL,
Maxwell CN, Zhang Y, Andreini C, Karty JA, Chazin WJ,
Trinidad JC et al.: Multi-metal restriction by calprotectin
impacts de novo ﬂavin biosynthesis in Acinetobacter
baumannii. Cell Chem Biol 2019, 26:745-755.e7
The authors demonstrate that calprotectin limits availability of multiple
transition metals that include iron, zinc, and copper. This initiates a multimetal starvation response involving multiple transcriptional regulators
that inﬂuence critical metabolic processes such as de novo riboﬂavin
synthesis.
29. Nakashige TG, Zhang B, Krebs C, Nolan EM: Human calprotectin
is an iron-sequestering host-defense protein. Nat Chem Biol
2015, 11:765-771.
30. Besold AN, Gilston BA, Radin JN, Ramsoomair C, Culbertson EM,
Li CX, Cormack BP, Chazin WJ, Kehl-Fie TE, Culotta VC: Role of
calprotectin in withholding zinc and copper from Candida
albicans. Infect Immun 2018, 86.
31. Nakashige TG, Zygiel EM, Drennan CL, Nolan EM: Nickel
sequestration by the host-defense protein human
calprotectin. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 139:8828-8836.
32. Damo SM, Kehl-Fie TE, Sugitani N, Holt ME, Rathi S, Murphy WJ,
Zhang Y, Betz C, Hench L, Fritz G et al.: Molecular basis for
manganese sequestration by calprotectin and roles in the
innate immune response to invading bacterial pathogens. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2013, 110:3841-3846.
33. Xiao X, Yeoh BS, Vijay-Kumar M: Lipocalin 2: an emerging player
in iron homeostasis and inﬂammation. Annu Rev Nutr 2017,
37:103-130.
34. Barbut F, Gouot C, Lapidus N, Suzon L, Syed-Zaidi R, Lalande V,
Eckert C: Faecal lactoferrin and calprotectin in patients with
Clostridium difﬁcile infection: a case-control study. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2017, 36:2423-2430.
35. Thorsvik S, Damas JK, Granlund AV, Flo TH, Bergh K, Ostvik AE,
Sandvik AK: Fecal neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
as a biomarker for inﬂammatory bowel disease. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2017, 32:128-135.
36. Knippel RJ, Zackular JP, Moore JL, Celis AI, Weiss A,
Washington MK, DuBois JL, Caprioli RM, Skaar EP: Heme
sensing and detoxiﬁcation by HatRT contributes to
pathogenesis during Clostridium difﬁcile infection. PLoS
Pathog 2018, 14:e1007486.
37. Carter GP, Chakravorty A, Pham Nguyen TA, Mileto S, Schreiber F,
Li L, Howarth P, Clare S, Cunningham B, Sambol SP et al.:
Deﬁning the roles of TcdA and TcdB in localized
gastrointestinal disease, systemic organ damage, and the
host response during Clostridium difﬁcile infections. mBio
2015, 6:e00551.
38. Mocny JC, Olson JS, Connell TD: Passively released heme from
hemoglobin and myoglobin is a potential source of nutrient
iron for Bordetella bronchiseptica. Infect Immun 2007, 75:48574866.
39. Giordano N, Hastie JL, Smith AD, Foss ED, Gutierrez-Munoz DF,
Carlson PE Jr: Cysteine desulfurase IscS2 plays a role in
oxygen resistance in Clostridium difﬁcile. Infect Immun 2018,
86.
40. Weiss A, Lopez CA, Beavers WN, Rodriguez J, Skaar EP:
Clostridioides difﬁcile strain-dependent and strainindependent adaptations to a microaerobic environment.
Microb Genom 2021, 7 http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/mgen.0.000738.
41. Nairz M, Weiss G: Iron in infection and immunity. Mol Aspects
Med 2020, 75:100864.
42. Troxell B, Hassan HM: Transcriptional regulation by Ferric
Uptake Regulator (Fur) in pathogenic bacteria. Front Cell Infect
Microbiol 2013, 3:59.
43. Ho TD, Ellermeier CD: Ferric uptake regulator fur control of
putative iron acquisition systems in Clostridium difﬁcile. J
Bacteriol 2015, 197:2930-2940.
44. Berges M, Michel AM, Lassek C, Nuss AM, Beckstette M,
Dersch P, Riedel K, Sievers S, Becher D, Otto A et al.: Iron
regulation in Clostridioides difﬁcile. Front Microbiol 2018,
9:3183.
Transition metals in Clostridioides difficile infection Gomez, Patel and Lopez
121
www.sciencedirect.com
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122

45. Zackular JP, Knippel RJ, Lopez CA, Beavers WN, Maxwell CN,
Chazin WJ, Skaar EP: ZupT facilitates Clostridioides difﬁcile
resistance to host-mediated nutritional immunity. mSphere
2020, 5.
46. Lopez CA, Beavers WN, Weiss A, Knippel RJ, Zackular JP,
Chazin W, Skaar EP: The immune protein calprotectin impacts
Clostridioides difﬁcile metabolism through zinc limitation.
mBio 2019, 10.
47. Hastie JL, Hanna PC, Carlson PE: Transcriptional response of
Clostridium difﬁcile to low iron conditions. Pathog Dis 2018, 76.
48. Fojcik C, Arnoux P, Ouerdane L, Aigle M, Alfonsi L, BorezeeDurant E: Independent and cooperative regulation of
staphylopine biosynthesis and trafﬁcking by Fur and Zur. Mol
Microbiol 2018, 108:159-177.
49.

Yang B, Nie X, Xiao Y, Gu Y, Jiang W, Yang C: Ferrous-ironactivated transcriptional factor AdhR regulates redox
homeostasis in Clostridium beijerinckii. Appl Environ Microbiol
2020, 86
This study describes ferrous iron-dependent transcriptional regulation of
alcohol dehydrogenase genes in an anaerobic Clostridial species. The
proposed mechanism links iron availability and redox status to regulation
of metabolic pathways.
50. Jin B, Newton SM, Shao Y, Jiang X, Charbit A, Klebba PE: Iron
acquisition systems for ferric hydroxamates, haemin and
haemoglobin in Listeria monocytogenes. Mol Microbiol 2006,
59:1185-1198.
51.

Zhu W, Winter MG, Spiga L, Hughes ER, Chanin R, Mulgaonkar A,
Pennington J, Maas M, Behrendt CL, Kim J et al.:
Xenosiderophore utilization promotes Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron resilience during colitis. Cell Host Microbe
2020, 27:376-388.e8
The authors describe how a member of the commensal gut microbiota
scavenges iron in the iron-limited inﬂamed gut. The bacterium Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron engages in siderophore piracy by takings up
siderophores
produced
by
distantly
related
bacteria
to
sustain
colonization.
52. Cartron ML, Maddocks S, Gillingham P, Craven CJ, Andrews SC:
Feo—transport of ferrous iron into bacteria. Biometals 2006,
19:143-157.
53. Linkous RO, Sestok AE, Smith AT: The crystal structure of
Klebsiella pneumoniae FeoA reveals a site for protein-protein
interactions. Proteins 2019, 87:897-903.
54.

Deshpande A, Wu X, Huo W, Palmer KL, Hurdle JG:
Chromosomal resistance to metronidazole in Clostridioides
difﬁcile can be mediated by epistasis between iron
homeostasis and oxidoreductases. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2020, 64
The study describes pathways that are important in determining resistance to an antibiotic commonly used to treat C. difﬁcile infection.
Mutations in the iron transporter feoB1 increased resistance to
metronidazole and synergized with subsequent mutations in other genes
that encode proteins involved in electron-transfer reactions.
55. Kelly CR, Fischer M, Allegretti JR, LaPlante K, Stewart DB,
Limketkai BN, Stollman NH: ACG clinical guidelines: prevention,
diagnosis, and treatment of Clostridioides difﬁcile infections.
Am J Gastroenterol 2021, 116:1124-1147.
56.

Fletcher JR, Pike CM, Parsons RJ, Rivera AJ, Foley MH,
McLaren MR, Montgomery SA, Theriot CM: Clostridioides
difﬁcile exploits toxin-mediated inﬂammation to alter the host
nutritional landscape and exclude competitors from the gut
microbiota. Nat Commun 2021, 12:462
By comparing wild type and a toxin regulator-deﬁcient C. difﬁcile strain,
the authors describe how the nutrient landscape in the gut changes
through toxin-mediated inﬂammation. C. difﬁcile catabolism of amino
acids and carbohydrates from the host extracellular matrix during CDI
provides a ﬁtness advantage over the commensal microbiota.
57.

Knippel RJ, Wexler AG, Miller JM, Beavers WN, Weiss A, de CrecyLagard V, Edmonds KA, Giedroc DP, Skaar EP: Clostridioides
difﬁcile senses and hijacks host heme for incorporation into
an oxidative stress defense system. Cell Host Microbe 2020,
28:411-421.e6
The authors demonstrate how C. difﬁcile transcriptionally regulates its
response to heme. This newly described mechanism introduces heme
into the cellular membrane bound to the protein HsmA to relieve heme
toxicity, protect against oxidative stress, and reduce sensitivity to the
antibiotic metronidazole.
58. Boekhoud IM, Sidorov I, Nooij S, Harmanus C, Bos-Sanders I,
Viprey V, Spittal W, Clark E, Davies K, Freeman J et al.: Haem is
crucial for medium-dependent metronidazole resistance in
clinical isolates of Clostridioides difﬁcile. J Antimicrob
Chemother 2021, 76:1731-1740.
59. McAllister KN, Martinez Aguirre A, Sorg JA: The selenophosphate
synthetase, selD, is important for Clostridioides difﬁcile
physiology. J Bacteriol 2021, 12.
60. Permpoonpattana P, Phetcharaburanin J, Mikelsone A,
Dembek M, Tan S, Brisson MC, La Ragione R, Brisson AR,
Fairweather N, Hong HA et al.: Functional characterization of
Clostridium difﬁcile spore coat proteins. J Bacteriol 2013,
195:1492-1503.
61. Neumann-Schaal M, Metzendorf NG, Troitzsch D, Nuss AM,
Hofmann JD, Beckstette M, Dersch P, Otto A, Sievers S: Tracking
gene expression and oxidative damage of O2-stressed
Clostridioides difﬁcile by a multi-omics approach. Anaerobe
2018, 53:94-107.
62. Lin YP, Kuo CJ, Koleci X, McDonough SP, Chang YF: Manganese
binds to Clostridium difﬁcile Fbp68 and is essential for
ﬁbronectin binding. J Biol Chem 2011, 286:3957-3969.
63. Hughes A, Wilson S, Dodson EJ, Turkenburg JP, Wilkinson AJ:
Crystal structure of the putative peptide-binding protein AppA
from Clostridium difﬁcile. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun
2019, 75:246-253.
122
Cell regulation
Current Opinion in Microbiology 2022, 65:116–122
www.sciencedirect.com